[Amit Varma]: My guest in this episode mentions how a PhD advisor in the 1980s would ask all aspiring
[Amit Varma]: PhD students one question. He would say, do you sleep well at night? If the answer was
[Amit Varma]: yes, he would say, well, then you don't need to do a PhD. The implication, of course, is
[Amit Varma]: that doing a PhD is a task of such seriousness that you should only attempt it if you really,
[Amit Varma]: really care about a problem, if it keeps you up at night. Now, the question may seem glib.
[Amit Varma]: Most people, I would hope, even in these times, sleep well at night. That doesn't mean they
[Amit Varma]: don't have deep interests or they don't care about them. But I like the question as a way
[Amit Varma]: of concentrating the mind. The question here really is, what do you care about? What matters
[Amit Varma]: to you? One question I've asked myself, and that I ask you, dear listener, is that when
[Amit Varma]: you wake up in the morning, what is it that makes you look forward to the day? The meta
[Amit Varma]: questions that arise out of these, what matters to you, what makes you happy, are questions
[Amit Varma]: that we often don't think about enough. We get into a groove of living our lives in a
[Amit Varma]: certain way, thinking about the world in a certain way, and then inertia ensures it continues
[Amit Varma]: like that. But if we asked ourselves these questions, if we knew ourselves a little better,
[Amit Varma]: maybe we'd live different lives. Maybe we'd snap out of the same old, same old.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen. My guest today is Mukulika Banerjee, who would stay
[Amit Varma]: awake at night asking a question that became her first remarkable book, and who then kept
[Amit Varma]: asking questions, though she's going to be at the receiving end of questions today. Her
[Amit Varma]: first big question came to her in 1988, when Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan died. He had led one
[Amit Varma]: of the largest nonviolent movements anywhere. And her question was, how did this nonviolent
[Amit Varma]: movement arise from a community, the community of Pathans, that was stereotyped as being
[Amit Varma]: violent and macho? She took over a decade to answer this question, some of which she
[Amit Varma]: spent living in the northwest frontier province in Pakistan, traveling from village to village
[Amit Varma]: to find survivors of the Khudai Khidmatgar, or servants of God, as the movement was known.
[Amit Varma]: Her book, The Pathan Unarmed, answers this question. And her other books also take on
[Amit Varma]: big questions. Her 2014 book, Why India Votes, asks the question, why do poor people bother
[Amit Varma]: with voting when elected governments don't seem to be making their lives any better?
[Amit Varma]: She co-wrote a book called The Saree, where the question is, why do modern women wear
[Amit Varma]: such a seemingly ancient dress? It's a study of our society, not just a dress. Her latest
[Amit Varma]: book, Cultivating Democracy, takes a closer look at the hollowing out of Indian democracy.
[Amit Varma]: All these books are so rich in detail, and her life itself so interesting, that even
[Amit Varma]: though this has ended up as the longest episode of The Seen and The Unseen, I don't know
[Amit Varma]: how the time passed, and it felt like we had so much more left to talk about. Even in our
[Amit Varma]: conversation after the recording stopped, she was dropping gems like, quote, instead
[Amit Varma]: of vigilance, we have vigilantes, stop quote. I love this conversation, which is not just
[Amit Varma]: about her awesome books, but about her life, the understated feminism of her mother's generation,
[Amit Varma]: the idealism of her father's generation, the evolution of her academic disciplines. It
[Amit Varma]: contains multitudes. I'm sure you'll like it as well. But before we begin, let's take
[Amit Varma]: a quick commercial break. These days, I look around me and I see people making two kinds
[Amit Varma]: of mistakes. One, they overestimate human intelligence. I know many people who would
[Amit Varma]: fail the Turing test. And two, they underestimate artificial intelligence. When AlphaZero beat
[Amit Varma]: Stockfish in chess a few years ago, I realized that AI is not just about doing computations
[Amit Varma]: and calculations better than humans, but that AI can think and it will inevitably do so
[Amit Varma]: better than humans. I don't see this as a threat, but as an opportunity. AI is already
[Amit Varma]: making our lives better in countless unseen ways, and will keep helping us to be the best
[Amit Varma]: version of ourselves. And tracking this is the sponsor of this episode, a fascinating
[Amit Varma]: new podcast called Paradigm Shift. Paradigm Shift is a new show by Microsoft India, produced
[Amit Varma]: by ATS Studios and hosted by my friend and former guest on the show, Harsha Bhogle. In
[Amit Varma]: this show, every Friday, Harsha tells us stories of the intersection of artificial intelligence
[Amit Varma]: and human lives. 30 years ago, these stories would have been speculative fiction. But now
[Amit Varma]: they're around us and some of them blow my mind, you really have to listen to the show.
[Amit Varma]: Paradigm Shift is available on Spotify, Apple Podcasts, Amazon Music, basically all podcast
[Amit Varma]: apps. And Harsha is the man, the best kind of storyteller for the best kind of stories.
[Amit Varma]: To learn more about how Microsoft is empowering developers and organisations and all of us
[Amit Varma]: with the power of AI, do visit microsoft.com slash AI and check out Paradigm Shift, stories
[Amit Varma]: of innovation shaped by intelligence.
[Amit Varma]: Mukulika, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you very much for having me.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you know, normally what happens is that whenever I have a guest on the show, I read
[Amit Varma]: their books, do all of that, which of course I did this time as well. But what I was struck
[Amit Varma]: by is that your books cover such vast territory, right? So, you know, with other authors, there's
[Amit Varma]: one trajectory, it's like kind of one thing, which in a sense, this is, I mean, three of
[Amit Varma]: your books are, you know, ethnography and anthropology and all of that, and they come
[Amit Varma]: out of that. But there's also a book on the Sari, there's also a wonderful book you edited
[Amit Varma]: on, you know, Muslim portraits, which I feel is, I mean, the central premise of that is
[Amit Varma]: so sort of relevant in the times that we are living in. And we'll discuss that also. But
[Amit Varma]: before we kind of, you know, get started, tell me a bit about your, you know, your early
[Amit Varma]: life. You know, where did you grow up? How did you, you know, get around to beginning
[Amit Varma]: the journey of yours?
[Guest]: Well, I suppose you encourage your guests, Amit, to narrativize their lives. And so this
[Guest]: is a wonderful invitation to impose some sort of, you know, post-facto structure on one's
[Guest]: intellectual development. But I think there have been very formative periods. The first,
[Guest]: which I don't have any memories of, but clearly had a very strong influence, which was just
[Guest]: being born in a military hospital in the middle of an Indo-Pak war. And I think it has curiously
[Guest]: shaped my subconscious. A, I'm very rarely late to anything. Any events I organize and
[Guest]: I've done many, many, many events in London and elsewhere. I always start on time, which
[Guest]: is a rarity as we acknowledge as South Asians, but also being born in the middle of an Indo-Pak
[Guest]: war. And my first friend, I suppose, in this world was a young Tibetan boy. And these are
[Guest]: stories of course, you're told by your parents and it shapes how you think about these relationships
[Guest]: and what you make of them as an adult when you can shape them. So I think those remain
[Guest]: as formative influences and we can talk about whether they have in fact had an influence
[Guest]: later. But then I had these very foundational five years living in the Andamans, you know,
[Guest]: in the Andaman Nicobar Islands and Port Blair, the capital. And it was a time when I was
[Guest]: just, that was my first school, my first experience of education, of learning, going to a school
[Guest]: run by Catholic nuns. But unlike the other Catholic institutions I studied in later,
[Guest]: here there was, you know, the Carmel Convent School in Port Blair was run by very austere
[Guest]: nuns. You know, I remember very vivid memories of frayed collars of, you know, clean washed
[Guest]: but frayed collars and cuffs of nuns learning, teaching us to mend stuff, making do with
[Guest]: very little. And so that was a very early exposure to austerity and the sort of simple
[Guest]: virtue of it. But also I think it was my first exposure to what we now recognise as that
[Guest]: very precious aspect of India where you were meeting children from all different parts
[Guest]: of the country. I had Tamil friends and Assamese friends and Punjabi friends and we were in
[Guest]: and out of each other's houses and eating each other's tiffin box and out of each other's
[Guest]: tiffin boxes, therefore tasting cuisine that was unfamiliar, not made at home. And I think
[Guest]: those have been very, very lasting influences. But also Port Blair physically as a place
[Guest]: was stunning. You know, it was beautiful, it was very small, there was very little infrastructure,
[Guest]: very few cars on the road, we could walk to school. But there was a district library.
[Guest]: So the first time, my mother was a great feminist in many ways, in that very understated way,
[Guest]: without ever saying it, she took my older sister and me to the district library once
[Guest]: and said, this is how a library works and got our cards made and so on. And it was about,
[Guest]: for our little legs, it took us about 20-25 minutes from home. And we discovered the joy
[Guest]: of checking books out and going back every week and getting, you know, you couldn't wait
[Guest]: for Saturday when you could take your pile of books back and get another new pile. So
[Guest]: that was important, as was the sea, which we could see from our house. We went and bathed
[Guest]: in it every Sunday. There were cashew groves and coconut and papaya. And in our own house,
[Guest]: there was this huge mango tree. And that mango, the love of mangoes, I think was definitely
[Guest]: formed at that very year. But also the importance of gardens and gardening. It was my mother,
[Guest]: it's only much later I realized that, you know, she had this interest in gardening.
[Guest]: And I certainly loved just being in the garden and watching things grow. And I mentioned
[Guest]: this because, as you know, I've just completed a book called Cultivating Democracy. And cultivation
[Guest]: and what it means as a practice is something that you really have to do at some stage,
[Guest]: even if it's just trying to grow a potted plant on your windowsill. It doesn't matter
[Guest]: what the scale of it, but I think the practice of it, the kind of alertness, vigilance, commitment
[Guest]: that the act of cultivation is, again, that was something that I remember from those very
[Guest]: early days in the Andamans. But also it was really, you know, you could have the Navy
[Guest]: band in the house rehearsing for a dance drama that we were part of, or Bharatanatyam classes.
[Guest]: And so there was that mix, which we took completely for granted. And of course, in contemporary
[Guest]: India, we now realize just how threatened that kind of formative experience is now.
[Amit Varma]: I was, you know, while reading your book, The Pathan Unarmed, I was struck by this anecdote
[Amit Varma]: in it, which again, you know, which came back to mind because you mentioned the sea and
[Amit Varma]: mangoes and gardening and all of that. And this was an anecdote about the notion of time
[Amit Varma]: where you ask one of these old gentlemen from the Khudai Khidmatgar, or rather he asked
[Amit Varma]: you how old you were. And then he said, I had spun 20 sets of clothes by the time you
[Amit Varma]: were born, stop quote, you know, measuring time almost and you take a charkha and you
[Amit Varma]: make yourself a set of clothes and then they wear out and then you make another and it's
[Amit Varma]: like 20 cycles of that. And I was just struck by that way of measuring time. And then you
[Amit Varma]: sort of mentioned the sea and gardening. And it seems to me that there also that those
[Amit Varma]: are conducive to developing a slower sense of time, you know, cliched as it is a sea
[Amit Varma]: with a sense of vastness and peace. The very act of gardening is really an act of patience.
[Amit Varma]: It is an act that is not looking to immediate gratification, but just taking joy in a process
[Amit Varma]: and trusting it gets you somewhere. And one of the sort of things that struck me about
[Amit Varma]: your, you know, your rich career and your writing life is that there is that sense of
[Amit Varma]: everything stretched out. Like I would not even, I can't imagine myself doing the things
[Amit Varma]: you did because I just, I've always kind of been in a little bit more of a hurry. And
[Amit Varma]: yet you took this relaxed pace, you know, while writing the Pathana Naam, you spent
[Amit Varma]: 10 years in Pakistan and, you know, all of that, actually living there, just letting
[Amit Varma]: time pass. And I understand that that's part of ethnography, that you study a people, you
[Amit Varma]: live among them and you do it for a long period of time and so on and so forth. And I think
[Amit Varma]: most modern people won't have that patience. You know, most young people today, even those
[Amit Varma]: who find the kind of work that you are doing attractive and, you know, they might think
[Amit Varma]: to themselves, hey, I'd like to do something like that. But when you think that I'm going
[Amit Varma]: to spend 10 years in one place, just talking to people, or I'm going to go back to the
[Amit Varma]: same couple of villages in this obscure place for 15 years, I'm going to spend my, you know,
[Amit Varma]: university vacation just going back and living in these two villages, as you did for, you
[Amit Varma]: know, cultivating democracy. And tell me a little bit about this, that was it always
[Amit Varma]: like this for you, that you're relaxed, you're chilling? Did it have something to do perhaps,
[Amit Varma]: even with Port Blair, in the sense that you're not in a city, you're not in a hustling bustling
[Amit Varma]: city, you're always, you know, going here, going there, party here, class there, all
[Amit Varma]: of that. But, you know, or is it just something inherent to you that you just want to settle
[Amit Varma]: into the things that you do and not take time?
[Guest]: That's a very interesting way to think about it. I had honestly never done that before.
[Guest]: And you may be right, it might be that formative period in Port Blair, which, to my mind is
[Guest]: still my happy place. You know, when I have to think, when I have to be, to return to
[Guest]: one's childhood, that's always the happy place, precisely because it wasn't full of pressure.
[Guest]: Just as you said, there was time, I remember digging a hole in the garden, you know, I
[Guest]: must have been four or five years old, and painstakingly digging a hole with God knows
[Guest]: what, you know, a spoon probably, because I wouldn't have been allowed any tools. And
[Guest]: then waiting for it to fill up with monsoon water. And then the taking the pleasure and
[Guest]: going and standing in that pool of water for no purpose other than feeling what it is to
[Guest]: stand in muddy water in the garden that I had dug. Now, it's not a bad metaphor for
[Guest]: fieldwork.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Yeah, now that you say it, I think, you know, anthropology is the kind of discipline that
[Guest]: recognizes, it's very humbling, because you realize that you may know a lot of things
[Guest]: and you may have read lots of books and thought a lot of thoughts and written a lot of essays.
[Guest]: But you land up in a place where you don't speak the language and you're learning to
[Guest]: speak the language, as I did in Pakistan. And I didn't live there for 10 years, just
[Guest]: to give a clear, I took 10 years to write the book. But no Indian citizen would have
[Guest]: been allowed to live for quite that long, as I did live for several months, it's true,
[Guest]: in what used to be called the Northwest Frontier Province, and now it's called Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
[Guest]: in Peshawar, Charsadda. But when you land up in a society like that, where you don't
[Guest]: know anything, right, you don't know any norms, you don't know how to behave, you don't know
[Guest]: what is polite, you're learning, you're worse than the children are in that situation, you
[Guest]: can't rush. You know, if you rush, you're like a bull in a china shop and you'll offend
[Guest]: people. And the major goal for an anthropologist or a sociologist, as we would say in India,
[Guest]: is to build trust, right? So unless you can build trust and confidence with people you
[Guest]: want to understand, you're not going to get anywhere. And you can't build trust by rushing
[Guest]: things. So you've got to allow yourself to make those mistakes. You've got to ask the
[Guest]: questions, the stupid questions we laughed at, deal with the loneliness, write a diary
[Guest]: every night, think about how you behaved, what you did, the conversations you had, reflect
[Guest]: on all of that. That takes time. And it's intensely lonely doing research like that.
[Guest]: And then you realize actually the best way to deal with that loneliness is to build friendships
[Guest]: in the field. And it is people you're working with who become your friends, who look after
[Guest]: you when you're ill, who you can have a cry with if you're missing home. And that's how
[Guest]: you build trust. Suddenly they begin to see this academic or scholar or student, as I
[Guest]: was in Pakistan, you know, I come from the University of Oxford, a place that they had
[Guest]: all heard of. And suddenly all that is stripped away and you're just a young, vulnerable woman
[Guest]: in a strange country. And I think that's when the shift happens and people begin to tell
[Guest]: you stuff that you want to learn and want to know. So yeah, you can't rush this. I don't
[Guest]: think anyone who knows me would say I am a patient sort of person at all. I'm not. I'm
[Guest]: always, you know, I like to get stuff done. But intellectually, you're right. I haven't
[Guest]: been in a rush, partly because I have quite successfully, I think, resisted the need to
[Guest]: churn out stuff to publish all the time, which is very much how academia has got now. It
[Guest]: wasn't quite so bad when I started 25 years ago, but now it's relentless. And I still
[Guest]: have managed to stay quite old school about this and say that, you know, it's worth publishing
[Guest]: when you have something to say and something that other people should spend time reading
[Guest]: rather than another citation on your CV. And that, again, that means that you probably
[Guest]: talk more about your ideas, you present stuff at seminars and conferences, have informal
[Guest]: conversations, let those ideas pickle and percolate and stew and form themselves into
[Guest]: ideas that are then worth sharing in print. And I've been quite happy to let that happen
[Guest]: and not rush things without being lazy. I think it requires work every single day, but
[Guest]: to let it take its own time. With Cultivating Democracy, it was 15 years because there was
[Guest]: part of me that wasn't sure what the book would read like, you know, what kind of book
[Guest]: would it be that would be worth, again, somebody's money and time to pick up and read something
[Guest]: about certain village India. There are lots of books about village India. And I didn't
[Guest]: want to write yet another village book describing, oh, here's a little village in India, read
[Guest]: about it, because think why, you know, why would anyone be interested? And I was interested
[Guest]: in democracy. So it took some time to think of the intellectual framing of the argument.
[Guest]: But in the meanwhile, I also, you know, got involved in other projects and wrote the book
[Guest]: on the Saree and did this massive sort of comparative work across India with a big team.
[Guest]: And while all those other projects were happening, the ideas for the big monograph were being
[Guest]: tossed about and tested and some settled and some didn't. And the ones that settled then
[Guest]: made their way into the book.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so that, you know, it strikes me that then that process of slowness, which I alluded
[Amit Varma]: to, which is during fieldwork and you're patient and you let things marinate and you let things
[Amit Varma]: happen around you and don't force anything, that it's a, you know, it's a similar process
[Amit Varma]: after the fieldwork where you let ideas marinate and, you know, years can pass like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: on your bio page at the LSE site, it says that you have presented your work at various
[Amit Varma]: platforms and I'm quoting now in Bern, Bonn, Chicago, Columbia, Delhi, Duke, Edinburgh,
[Amit Varma]: Gottingen, Heidelberg, Illinois, Indiana, Kalyani, Kolkata, London, Madison, Melbourne,
[Amit Varma]: New York, North Carolina, Oslo, Oxford, Pavia, Paris, Philadelphia, Princeton, Sussex and
[Amit Varma]: Yale. And thank God it's in alphabetical order. So by the time, you know, I could feel some
[Amit Varma]: relief when I reach P knowing it's not going to go on. And so I can see all this is also
[Amit Varma]: being part of the process where, as you mentioned, you're kind of sharing your ideas with people
[Amit Varma]: and letting them kind of form and so on against the pressures of academia. We'll come back
[Amit Varma]: to academia and indeed, you know, Pakistan and all of your work later. But to go to sort
[Amit Varma]: of go back to biography, you know, when you were talking about your childhood, another
[Amit Varma]: thing that struck me interestingly, was when you said that your mother was a feminist in
[Amit Varma]: an understated way. And this interests me, like I did an episode with Mrinal Pandey recently.
[Amit Varma]: And she spoke about how when she was, you know, around 14 or 15, she had an argument
[Amit Varma]: with her mother because her mother was always obsessing about whether her dad liked her
[Amit Varma]: food and so on and so forth. And Mrinalji then 14 or 15 said, why do you have to care
[Amit Varma]: about that? You know, why are you so obsessed about his food, live your own life and so
[Amit Varma]: on and so forth. And that was interesting because at that point in time, as Mrinalji
[Amit Varma]: said herself, the feminism was instinctive. It came from some instinctive sense of injustice.
[Amit Varma]: She put a frame to it later when she got down to reading books and all of that. So when
[Amit Varma]: you speak of this understated feminism that you saw in your mother, and I guess it's something
[Amit Varma]: that I guess perhaps you notice in hindsight when you look back on the past. Tell me a
[Amit Varma]: little bit about, you know, the understated feminisms of the past. Because today it's
[Amit Varma]: natural for every sensible person to be a feminist, male or female, you better. But,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in the past, where, you know, all these notions would have seemed so exotic,
[Amit Varma]: where, you know, expressing feminism could, you know, sort of just be out of place, you
[Amit Varma]: know, maybe threaten the fabric of your everyday life and so on and so forth. You know, tell
[Amit Varma]: me about that, about these understated feminisms that you might have observed in others and
[Amit Varma]: perhaps even in yourselves before you could put a frame to it.
[Guest]: That's such a lovely question. Thank you for it. Let me tell you one statement that my
[Guest]: mother made, which was a statement. And so it was not understated in that sense, it was
[Guest]: articulated. It was in the Andamans as it happened. And she was sitting with a bunch
[Guest]: of women, friends, you know, drinking coffee in the morning. And the sort of senior ranking
[Guest]: officers wife, so to speak, said to all of them, and she said to my mother, who was expecting
[Guest]: her third child, and she didn't know she was, whether she was going to have a boy or a girl.
[Guest]: And so they were talking about children. And she was, my mother was asked, Roma, what do
[Guest]: you want your daughters to be? Because she already had two daughters, or maybe she just
[Guest]: had her third daughter. So yes, that's probably what it was. And she said, what do you want
[Guest]: your daughters to be when they grow up? And my mother's reply was, I want my daughters
[Guest]: to be able to think. And she said, what kind of an answer is that? I'm asking you what
[Guest]: – she said, as long as they can think, they will know what they want to be. But they must
[Guest]: be able to think for themselves. And so this is probably the most articulated statement
[Guest]: of her feminism. She wasn't a social scientist. She taught physics, right? But she had come
[Guest]: from a world in the 1950s where she and her sisters were professors at Patna University.
[Guest]: They had grown up in Bhagalpur. They came to Patna University because that was the big
[Guest]: university. Her sisters taught philosophy. She taught physics. They didn't have any
[Guest]: family in Patna. So they just hired this huge mansion with lots of rooms. And they all had
[Guest]: rooms and they all collectively contributed to the budget. And they rented out rooms.
[Guest]: So the other lodgers were also young women, working women. And I think they realized how
[Guest]: radical this was at one level. But at another level, it wasn't as if a huge fuss was made.
[Guest]: Their parents were perfectly okay with it. But they did mad things like, you know, once
[Guest]: take a tanga from Patna to Benares, you know, because they felt like it on a whim. And had,
[Guest]: you know, watched the latest cinema movie in the cinema house on a Sunday and then went
[Guest]: out for brunch, you know, things that sound incredibly modern. But there was, there were,
[Guest]: I think the 1950s for that generation of women was a decade of possibilities because they
[Guest]: had access to education. They had, I mean, in my mother's case, I remember asking actually
[Guest]: quite recently, not long before she passed away, whether she had memories of 15th August
[Guest]: 1947. And I'm glad I did because she did have memories. She had just finished school and
[Guest]: she heard the news and her instinct was to run all the way back to her school because
[Guest]: she felt that was a place where the new flag was going to be hoisted. And she wanted to
[Guest]: be there and she wanted to sing the anthem. And she remembers running with the flag or
[Guest]: running to the school and the complete exhilaration of that moment. So, this is that generation,
[Guest]: you know, we have inherited that sense of possibility that they had about not only independence
[Guest]: from colonial rule, but also the possibility of women choosing to be certain kinds of people.
[Guest]: And she didn't actually rush into marriage, unlike one of her sisters, but she decided
[Guest]: that it was a bit of a bore to, you know, to be hampered by in-laws and being told what
[Guest]: to do. She had resisted wearing a sari right up until she, you know, was 20, I think, you
[Guest]: know, she'd wore those women in whom, I don't know whether you've ever seen those, you've
[Guest]: seen those magazines. I think many of our mothers of that generation were subscribers
[Guest]: and they had those elegant 1950s dresses. And these were women who just taught themselves
[Guest]: how to tailor, right? My mother, I don't think was an exception, but they just made themselves
[Guest]: these gorgeous dresses and resisted wearing a sari until they went to university and certainly
[Guest]: after she went to teach. But again, you know, she would never have called herself a Gandhian,
[Guest]: but she thought it was entirely appropriate that when she taught at university, she would
[Guest]: wear very simple saris, that this wasn't a place of glamour. Education was serious business.
[Guest]: You were smart, but simple and wore very simple saris. Anyway, so she resisted marriage. So
[Guest]: ultimately when my father and she met and they decided to marry, it was very much a
[Guest]: decision they jointly took. It was an inter-caste marriage. And frankly, you know, my mother
[Guest]: got a lot of grief from extended family for many, many years afterwards. But because it
[Guest]: was a choice she had made herself and understood the implications of it. But then curiously,
[Guest]: very much like Mrinalji's mother, you know, was in her own domesticity, a woman who attempted
[Guest]: to do everything. So she always worked full time, but she always insisted that no cook
[Guest]: could produce a meal worth serving at the table, both for herself and her family. And
[Guest]: so therefore, and she was a very, very brilliant and accomplished cook, so insisted on cooking
[Guest]: both meals. So at enormous cost to her energy and her time, but they didn't, I don't think
[Guest]: she saw that as a contradiction, you know, to have been so fiercely independent in her
[Guest]: choices and yet wanting to be this kind of, you know, multi-armed goddess woman who was
[Guest]: trying to do everything at some cost to her own sleep and energy and health. So when we
[Guest]: were growing up, it was, I didn't quite have the argument that Mrinalji had with her mother.
[Guest]: And I remember listening to that episode and identifying with it. But what was, what we
[Guest]: did know was this was not right, that she should be working so hard. So we would land
[Guest]: up in the kitchen to help and say, what can we do? And always her response was, have you
[Guest]: finished reading every book in the house? When you finish reading every book in the
[Guest]: house and you have nothing else to do, come and help me in the kitchen. Until then, please
[Guest]: use the time to go and read or do something else. And then we'd say, oh, but we want to
[Guest]: learn to cook. Everyone says you cook so well. And she'd say, well, you'll learn. It's not
[Guest]: rocket science. You will learn when you need to. But you'll never have this time back.
[Guest]: So this was, I think this was the feminism. And then to be very aware, and I know you've
[Guest]: always said on your shows that you're half Bengali. And I'm assuming from your surname
[Guest]: that your mother was Bengali, right?
[Guest]: Yep.
[Guest]: So there is a certain Bengali society, as we all know, is extremely cultured and values
[Guest]: education and especially that kind of Bhadralok, middle class, upper caste culture. But one
[Guest]: of the advantages of always growing up outside Bengal, you know, my mother had grown up in
[Guest]: Bhagalpur, my father's family were the first Bengalis in Gwalior. So our families were
[Guest]: from outside Bengal, but we always spoke Bengali at home. There was lots of music and both
[Guest]: classical and Tagore and others. So we were a very Bengali household outside Bengal always.
[Guest]: But my mother was very clear, right, about the hypocrisies of Bhadralok society towards
[Guest]: women as well. And this she was acerbic about, you know, and she would point this out to
[Guest]: us that it was interesting that, you know, Bengali women were expected to be intelligent
[Guest]: and accomplished and well-educated and well-read, but always had to know when to speak, not
[Guest]: to speak out of turn, never to be too argumentative, not too loud, to have enough feminine guile
[Guest]: to be able to navigate social spaces. And she would talk to us, not in any didactic
[Guest]: fashion, but we would discuss this stuff. We would discuss the Bengali literature that
[Guest]: she read voraciously and loved and was clearly very good at and spoke very beautiful, slightly
[Guest]: literary Bengali, which was, which I think instilled my love for the language.
[Guest]: So we were, I think, we didn't have a choice except to be extremely circumspect of any
[Guest]: societal expectations of young women. And in this, she had a hundred percent support
[Guest]: of my father, who was not going to raise three demure girls. And, you know, their project
[Guest]: was to be, for us to be what we wanted to be. And they would do as much as they could
[Guest]: within their limitations, but they would never say no. And I don't think they said no very
[Guest]: often to what we wanted to do. And that, in retrospect, and that compared to our friends
[Guest]: and families we saw around us was radical. And you appreciate this only later because
[Guest]: remember, this is, you know, and we all know this. I mean, certainly anyone growing up
[Guest]: in India knows this, that on countless train journeys or landing up at weddings or where
[Guest]: people didn't know you when passengers, you know, on the opposite berth would look at
[Guest]: my mother and three daughters and say,
[Guest]: Aap teen behen hain, achha bhai nahi hain?
[Guest]: You don't have a brother?
[Guest]: So, you don't have a brother was a statement and a pitting question that we grew up with.
[Guest]: And as we got older, we learnt what riposte to offer. So, in our teenage years, you know,
[Guest]: when we were much more angry about this, we'd say, so what, bhai nahi hai toh? You know,
[Guest]: why do we need a bhai as if we are not enough? And then we learnt to feel quite sorry for
[Guest]: women who felt they had to be defensive about this or even answer this question. And we
[Guest]: learnt to laugh off these questions, but not entirely, because it was always hurtful and
[Guest]: always made you angry every single time that somehow you were incomplete if you didn't
[Guest]: have a son or a brother. And therefore, decades later, of course, very recently, when both
[Guest]: my parents passed away, quite actually just 18 months apart, and my mother passed away
[Guest]: first. And when we went to do the cremation and relatives showed up, I think there were
[Guest]: some who still felt that they should offer their services as male relatives to perform
[Guest]: the last rites. And there was, you know, not even a second's hesitation in our head that
[Guest]: it was going to be anyone but us. And my older sister was very quick also to get rid of the
[Guest]: ageism of Hindu rituals, where she said, no, the three of us will do everything together.
[Guest]: And again, they found that first it was the women doing the rituals, which to be fair,
[Guest]: I have to say in a crematorium in Delhi, nobody really asked any questions. They did hesitate
[Guest]: when they realised that the oldest was not going to take precedence and all of us were
[Guest]: going to do this together. But you could see the surprise and slight shock amongst relatives,
[Guest]: definitely rather than friends, but they got used to it very quickly. And we did talk amongst
[Guest]: ourselves and say really specially for my mother, it would be such an insult to her
[Guest]: legacy and her memory to have it any other way. So I think a lot of these, you know,
[Guest]: to sum up what you're asking, I think the unarticulated feminisms were the ones that
[Guest]: were part of our DNA. And education and being in Delhi in growing up in school and university
[Guest]: and all those later influences and reading gave us the language to articulate these ideas
[Guest]: better.
[Amit Varma]: And that's such a lovely story about you're going to the kitchen and your mother saying,
[Amit Varma]: no, you come and help me after you've read all the books in it. There's something so
[Amit Varma]: elegant about this kind of feminism that comes out through choices you make in your everyday
[Amit Varma]: life where you're exercising your agency. Like we live in an age of so much posturing
[Amit Varma]: going on around us, that there is always a need to signal how virtuous you are and how
[Amit Varma]: feminist you are and all of these things. And it seems that in that generation, through
[Amit Varma]: quiet actions, maybe just going out to see a film, or, of course, the not so quiet action
[Amit Varma]: of taking a tonga from one town to the other in the fifties, like, my God, that sounds
[Amit Varma]: so dramatic today. Well, I mean, your parents must have been really impressive people. Therefore,
[Amit Varma]: but tell me when she asked you to come back after you've read everything, right? What
[Amit Varma]: is the kind of stuff you were reading at that time? Like in your childhood, what were the
[Amit Varma]: kind of books that you had around you? In what way did they influence you? Like one
[Amit Varma]: of the things I've kind of realized over time is that the parts of that we often remember
[Amit Varma]: our first few years much more vividly than later, you know, adulthood, things can just
[Amit Varma]: pass in a flash, especially when you're going to so many cities as you are and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, memories of childhood can sometimes be vivid, you know, you can remember early
[Amit Varma]: books that you read, what influenced you in what way? So what kind of things were you
[Amit Varma]: reading? And, you know, and how were you shaping? How were you shaping as a person? How were
[Amit Varma]: you, you know, what was your concept? What was your conception of yourself? I'm sure
[Amit Varma]: as a 10 year old, you weren't saying I want to do ethnography. So, you know, how was that
[Amit Varma]: developing? Tell me a bit about that.
[Guest]: Okay, so I'll talk about what Delhi was like later. But let me, you know, address your
[Guest]: question about what I was reading. So one of the big, there were many shocks, as you
[Guest]: can imagine, moving from Port Blair to Delhi. And one of them was that we realized just
[Guest]: how bad our Hindi was. Because, and you know, it's the bane of many Bengali households,
[Guest]: but my father's Hindi was brilliant, having grown up in Gwalior. So, but we never really
[Guest]: had conversational Hindi because at home we spoke Bengali. And increasingly, as we began
[Guest]: to go through schools, a classic thing, the children would speak to each other in English.
[Guest]: So amongst us, we did. So, in good middle class household fashion, we used to have,
[Guest]: you know, the newspaper guy used to also give you periodicals, and you read the periodical
[Guest]: for two days or three days, and then you gave it back. So you didn't have to buy periodicals,
[Guest]: right? It was a circulation periodical that the newspaper guy gave you. So my mother began
[Guest]: all these subscriptions of Nandan, Champak, Chandamama, you know, these were the children's
[Guest]: Hindi magazines, which we began to read. And so that was the first time I began to read
[Guest]: Hindi properly, you know, and with any fluency. Of course, the temptation was always to just
[Guest]: to do the puzzles and to read the cartoons and send it back, but we had to read at least
[Guest]: one or two stories in it. And they were beautifully produced. I mean, I haven't seen those magazines
[Guest]: in even installs, you know, recently, when I used to look for them for my daughter, when
[Guest]: she was growing up in London, and I thought how lovely to have those kind of publications,
[Guest]: I just couldn't find them. So there was that, though I can't ever confess to, you know,
[Guest]: having read Hindi properly beyond what was the fantastic literature actually in the Rashtrabharti
[Guest]: textbooks that we had to study in school. And there was also a burgeoning culture of
[Guest]: reading English periodicals of Illustrated, Whitley, or Junior Statesman, and you know,
[Guest]: all of the others. And then eventually the sort of glossy, glamorous India Today arriving
[Guest]: every fortnight with advertising of the kind that we had never seen before, and so on.
[Guest]: But again, learning to read news analysis, reading columns, that was the first exposure
[Guest]: to it. But in school, of course, having switched from Carmel Convent Port Blair to Carmel Convent
[Guest]: Delhi meant that we were in that English convent educated environment where the library was
[Guest]: run by an absolutely outstanding woman called Sister Patricia Ann, who, as giggly teenagers,
[Guest]: people made up all kinds of stories of what her past may have been, of being jilted at
[Guest]: the altar, because she was a very attractive, smiling, lovely woman. But she ran the library
[Guest]: and curated the collection with such love. So, but, you know, in that very Catholic way,
[Guest]: there was a prescriptive order in which you could read books. So, all these glass-fronted
[Guest]: cupboards had class three to four, class four to five, class five to six, you know, kind
[Guest]: of thing. And you were only, so when you had your library period, you went to the library
[Guest]: and only those two glass cupboards were open. But of course, while you waited your turn,
[Guest]: you had all the time to read periodicals in the library, but also look through the glass
[Guest]: covers of the other cupboards and you could see what you were missing and what you were
[Guest]: being shut out of. So, a friend of mine and I then, having read all the books in our cupboards
[Guest]: very quickly by borrowing everybody else's copies and so on, went to Sister Patricia
[Guest]: and said, you have to let us read Thomas Hardy. And we were 12, 13. And she said, no, no,
[Guest]: it's not for you. And we said, yes, it is, you know, we're bored of reading G.A. Henties
[Guest]: or whatever we had in our cupboard. And so she agreed. And then we were obsessed. We
[Guest]: were reading a Hardy novel every week. After the fourth week of continuous Hardy reading,
[Guest]: she said, right, that's the end of that. You're going to turn suicidal, girls, if you're going
[Guest]: to read so much Thomas Hardy. But the fire had been lit, you know, but it was so we were
[Guest]: – but the biggest, I remember from those years, the biggest struggle was to get hold
[Guest]: of books that you could – nobody bought books, right? So, you were borrowing. If anyone
[Guest]: had a copy of a book, you read it and passed it on and circulated it. But then the nuns
[Guest]: were very strict about not allowing non-academic books in your school bag. So, we used to have
[Guest]: like, you know, like Secret Service searches of our bags, of who's brought in, because
[Guest]: I think they worried that girls were eating Mills and Boons all the time and this wasn't
[Guest]: good for their moral development or something. So, getting hold of books was so, you know,
[Guest]: they were so pricey. And that's when the sort of People's Publishing House came into its
[Guest]: own in Delhi, because they had, of course, all the Russian greats at very affordable
[Guest]: editions. So, we just read all the Russians. We read Gorky and we read, of course, Tolstoy
[Guest]: and discovered short stories and novels and plays and that the fact that you could read
[Guest]: a Chekhov play, but while also attempting to – and we performed The Proposal once
[Guest]: and we used to do a play every year in school. So, I think getting hold – and then my father
[Guest]: had this big collection of fiction, which we worked our way through, but they were slightly
[Guest]: – it was books that he had bought when he was probably in medical college or something,
[Guest]: so older, and which we, I'm sure, were not meant to be reading, but we did. And, you
[Guest]: know, so I think what it inculcated more, a love of literature, of course, and love
[Guest]: of reading, but also the absolute joy of illicit pleasures, of reading slightly beyond your
[Guest]: level, of reading things that you should not quite be reading as a 12-year-old or a 13-year-old.
[Guest]: And then, of course, you know, a lot of households, you'll remember, you may know this, of course,
[Guest]: that I find this so curious now, living in the UK, as I've done for more than 30 years,
[Guest]: is completely pulp fiction writers like Sidney Sheldon and, of course, Ayn Rand. I know I've
[Guest]: heard her mentioned on earlier shows of yours by others, but Daniel Steele. I mean, you
[Guest]: know, these were the books which are really, I mean, pulp. I used to have – I remember
[Guest]: a relative once saying, oh, I have the complete works of Sidney Sheldon.
[Guest]: Sikhi, why?
[Guest]: But those were available. So I think – so going to university and having a library full
[Guest]: of books that you hadn't read was got to be the most thrilling thing about starting
[Guest]: university.
[Amit Varma]: It's such a fantastic story. And even looking through glass bookshelves, it's such a wonderful
[Amit Varma]: image, such a wonderful metaphor there, right? And I think, you know, today, of course, everybody
[Amit Varma]: has everything available to them. But I think just having those two shelves open, just it's
[Amit Varma]: so much richer. This is, you know, the world of discovery just there. And it's so delightful
[Amit Varma]: that you were, you know, when the boys your age were reading Hardy Boys, you were reading
[Amit Varma]: Thomas Hardy.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, I did read a lot of Hardy Boys and Nancy Drew, of course, too.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I got into serious literature when I happened to discover Dostoevsky, where,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I think I was 10 and on my father's shelf, I came across this modern library edition
[Amit Varma]: of something which was called House of the Dead. So I thought, oh, House of the Dead
[Amit Varma]: must be a good story.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, it's his years in the Siberian prison and all of that, and got completely
[Amit Varma]: hooked. And my dad never actually stopped me from reading anything. But when it came
[Amit Varma]: to cinema, he was a little strict. So I remember once I wanted to see an American werewolf
[Amit Varma]: in London, and he had the tape with him. And he said, Okay, but you sit in front of me
[Amit Varma]: and every time I tell you to turn around, turn around and don't look at the screen.
[Amit Varma]: So continuously through the film, I would be told to turn around and I would have to
[Amit Varma]: look at him looking at whatever was happening. So which, you know, and I've randomly remembered
[Amit Varma]: this after maybe, you know, 35 years. So maybe I should, you know, check out that film again
[Amit Varma]: and see what I missed. So tell me about your dad.
[Guest]: So I mean, he was a surgeon and had joined the army because the Indian Army needed surgeons
[Guest]: at that point in the in the 60s. So completely on a whim, he was in CMC Valour, where he
[Guest]: had trained, he had gone to Gwalior Medical College and then went to Valour, which was
[Guest]: of course, the place to be where he met my mother and then joined the army. And he was
[Guest]: posted to what is now everybody knows as Chakrata. But in those days, because it was a secret
[Guest]: medical establishment, it used to be called E22. So it didn't have you know, nobody knew
[Guest]: where so none of the relatives knew where he was working and was in charge of the hospital.
[Guest]: And he absolutely loved army life. I think it suited him. And so I think I was when I
[Guest]: was born in Chakrata, it was this very regimented, reassuringly disciplined, but also incredibly
[Guest]: physically challenging set of circumstances. No electricity, no water, snowed six months
[Guest]: of the year, lots of bears around and so on. Again, back to Delhi and then when he went
[Guest]: out to Port Blair, really again on a whim because they needed somebody to be director
[Guest]: of medical health services in the Andaman Nicobar Islands and my dad went for it. So
[Guest]: that was interesting because it combined his skills as a surgeon with having to be an administrator.
[Guest]: And of course, the medical superintendent was also the superintendent of the cellular
[Guest]: jail where, you know, all the political prisoners used to be kept. This was Kala Pani. So and
[Guest]: he loved it, really thrived in that dual role, both running the jail, working with the prisoners
[Guest]: and but also touring the islands. So his job really was there were primary health centers
[Guest]: in some places, but all emergency surgery and so on. It was his job to make sure that
[Guest]: people were looked after. And on one of those trips, he took the family with him. And there
[Guest]: I would say that, you know, while I was still very, very young, I have very vivid memories
[Guest]: of that trip. But certainly the anthropological curiosity about people who were so unlike
[Guest]: you. They looked different. You didn't understand a word of what they said. There were the Andamanese,
[Guest]: the Jaravas, the Ongais, you know, there were so many tribes of the Andaman Nicobar Islands
[Guest]: that we were very aware that we had nothing to do with them. You know, we were from mainland
[Guest]: India as it was referred to, who had been plonked there as part of the Indian state.
[Guest]: And the Indian state's attitude to indigenous populations there as elsewhere was, we've
[Guest]: got to civilize them. And that word was used without any sense of irony. And so the story
[Guest]: that my father loved to tell to his dying day, and quite rightly, it's a great story,
[Guest]: was being interrupted in a party one evening to be summoned to the hospital for emergency
[Guest]: surgery because five men from the government of India by the PWD or something had gone
[Guest]: to build roads forcibly in some island, and they had been shot at with arrows. And so
[Guest]: these five men had been rescued and brought back with arrows sticking out of their bodies,
[Guest]: and they'd gone through the body. And my dad was the only surgeon, so he spent all
[Guest]: night operating on each of them, pulling out those arrows carefully. All five of them survived,
[Guest]: and my dad kept two of the arrows as a souvenir. And it was the perfect metaphor for, I think,
[Guest]: what, you know, what, as I said, our attitude, our post-independent attitude to indigenous
[Guest]: populations all over India has been. And my father's, again, not a social scientist,
[Guest]: but I think there was a basic humanism which made him say, well, why on earth would you
[Guest]: force yourself when people, you know, no wonder you got shot at. Okay, of course I'll save
[Guest]: your life because that's what I do as a doctor, but why on earth were you doing this?
[Guest]: So the move to Delhi, I think, you know, which was obviously better for his, they needed
[Guest]: to come back. But what was really, there's so much one can say, and I'm sure, you know,
[Guest]: your listeners have a limited appetite for hearing about my parents, but I think what
[Guest]: was remarkable about him was his complete commitment, despite the possibility of making
[Guest]: a lot of money in private practice, his entire career was spent in public hospitals and government
[Guest]: hospitals. So he worked first in LNJPN, you know, Lok Nayak Jayaprakash Narayan Hospital,
[Guest]: that used to be called Irwin Hospital when he joined it first in the mid-70s, and then
[Guest]: to Ramanohar Lohia Hospital and was head of surgery there. But there was never a moment's
[Guest]: doubt, a lot of his friends had gone into private practice and made a lot of money and
[Guest]: had fancy cars and big houses. But he rather relished the challenge of not knowing how
[Guest]: he's going to get through the 300 patients waiting in his outpatients department, you
[Guest]: know, four hours to see all those patients, a huge variety of illnesses that you had to
[Guest]: be incredibly creative, a diagnostician to get to the bottom of. But he kind of thrived
[Guest]: in that and those stories of, you know, where LNJPN Hospital is in Delhi, it's on Jawaharlal
[Guest]: Nehru Mark, where we also lived on the same road, which is a very aptly named road because
[Guest]: it connects old and new Delhi. So it's on, it runs along Ramlila Maidan, where of course
[Guest]: the big political meetings used to be held, flanked by Turkman Gate and Delhi Gate. And
[Guest]: so in Irwin Hospital, LNJPN, Shahjahanabad, Old Delhi's working population of plumbers
[Guest]: and car mechanics and tailors and cobblers, all of these, this working population used
[Guest]: to come, this was the main government hospital. So I think, you know, 75% of my father's patients
[Guest]: were Muslim and very poor. But it also meant that my father, being a good Bengali householder,
[Guest]: on Sundays went shopping for fresh fish and vegetables, as any self-respecting Bengali
[Guest]: man would do. But he couldn't really walk through Shahjahanabad for very long without
[Guest]: being recognized or hailed by somebody. And he loved that. He was completely plugged into
[Guest]: that population. You know, we were there during the emergency. And so when the bulldozers,
[Guest]: which of course are in the news now for all the wrong reasons and were in the news then
[Guest]: for all the wrong reasons, we could see from our house, the bulldozers at Turkman Gate.
[Guest]: And you know, there was of course no social media, not even many telephones. We always
[Guest]: had a telephone because we were a doctor's house. But word spread through staff and the
[Guest]: few neighbors we had that this was happening. And it rippled through everywhere because
[Guest]: we were just so shocked by the violence of that image of people's homes being just raised
[Guest]: to the ground. And these were people who, you know, we were connected to. These were
[Guest]: people who came to our house at Eid because my father was absolutely very, very strict
[Guest]: about never accepting any, any presents or rewards for being at the end of treatment
[Guest]: of successful treatments of patients. But on Eid, they would say, you know, you can't
[Guest]: say no today. And so we would be drowning in sevai or, you know, in kormas or whatever
[Guest]: that people brought. So these were people, you know, who were in and out of our house.
[Guest]: And it was those homes that were being raised. Of course, we were too little to know the
[Guest]: whole sterilization program and what was going on with populations. And in a bizarre coming
[Guest]: of full circle, Jahangir Puri, where the bulldozers have been recently, are of course is one of
[Guest]: the places where displaced populations from there were settled. So, you know, these things
[Guest]: come back in cycles in modern India, much like it's politics in some ways. So while
[Guest]: it is something that happened in the past, the resonances in the present are very, very
[Guest]: present.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And for my listeners, if you want to read more about Turkman Gate, the sterilizations,
[Amit Varma]: one of the many books on the emergency that I recommend strongly is Kumi Kapoor's book
[Amit Varma]: on it, where she does a really good job writing about it. And, you know, the thing is, looking
[Amit Varma]: back in hindsight, we know that it ended there. It was, it was terrible, but it ended. Looking
[Amit Varma]: at and this is, you know, completely unrelated to our conversation, but looking at what's
[Amit Varma]: going on today, I don't know where it ends. I don't, you know, this is, this is not, this
[Amit Varma]: is not sort of, we haven't seen the worst of it. But, you know, leaving that aside,
[Amit Varma]: another thought that strikes me, like you, you, you refer to, you know, your dad's idealism
[Amit Varma]: of working in government hospitals and just giving himself to that challenge. And I remember
[Amit Varma]: chatting with my dad about why he joined the civil services in the mid-sixties and what
[Amit Varma]: it was like and all that. And he could have, you know, he had offers from the private sector.
[Amit Varma]: He had offers from Cambridge, I think, to do a PhD there and all of that. He chose to
[Amit Varma]: join the IAS for different reasons. But one of the things that struck me was the idealism
[Amit Varma]: of him and his colleagues at that point in time, where they're joining this not because
[Amit Varma]: it's a good career path or they'll, you know, be in positions of power and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But there is that fresh idealism because, you know, we are still a young country and
[Amit Varma]: so on. Like you spoke about your mother's excitement when she wanted to run to the school
[Amit Varma]: to see the flag. And, you know, in that generation, I just, you know, you see so much of this
[Amit Varma]: idealism. And just thinking aloud, I wonder where are these idealists today? Like, you
[Amit Varma]: know, in the sense that if you were to see such idealism, where would you see it today?
[Amit Varma]: Is it that we are just in different times where you no longer, you know, that it doesn't
[Amit Varma]: make sense to be so idealistic that you're probably, you know, that the upside of, you
[Amit Varma]: know, following a different kind of life is so good that, you know, why bother? And I'm
[Amit Varma]: completely thinking aloud. And obviously, one can just look at outliers in any generation
[Amit Varma]: and find a difference. But do you sort of have any thoughts on this?
[Guest]: I do, actually, because I spend so much time in rural India. I mean, to start with, even
[Guest]: with the services, with the civil services, with IAS, with all the other services. I mean,
[Guest]: right up until when I was traveling around Bengal in the early few years of the century,
[Guest]: you know, trying to find a field site and settling down and just going to other places
[Guest]: everywhere. Of course, the people you could talk to was the DM or the collector or the
[Guest]: SP. And often they were living apart from their families who were in the capital and
[Guest]: they were on their own. And they were, of course, delighted if an educated English speaking
[Guest]: person of their class showed up and had a chat. But I've learned so much from officers
[Guest]: of, you know, they were my counterparts often in the services. And they had that sense of
[Guest]: commitment. And I, you know, I'm not, I don't think it's disappeared. I really don't think
[Guest]: that our parents had it. And where has it gone? I don't feel dispirited. I mean, apart
[Guest]: from anything else, the civil services are still a very coveted career, maybe coveted
[Guest]: for the wrong reasons. And we've got to fix that. But there are everywhere. I mean, any
[Guest]: on any given day, one can quite easily, thanks to the way we can access this kind of information,
[Guest]: there are just millions of people across India making it a better place. You know, experimentations
[Guest]: with farming of the zillions of Anganwadi workers who've been working despite not getting
[Guest]: paid. I'm not sure they're doing it because they have nothing else to do. It is they understand
[Guest]: that, you know, if they don't keep a track of polio vaccinations, you're going to have,
[Guest]: even if you skip a few years, it's a disaster, right? So the commitment with which a local
[Guest]: Anganwadi worker, a local, you know, somebody cooking the midday meal properly, the way
[Guest]: the cleaners on the trains, you know, they're people who are, they take certain pride in
[Guest]: what they're doing. And it is a public good often that they are part of. It is not one
[Guest]: for private gain. Yes, they have the security of a salary, which is why these jobs are so
[Guest]: coveted. And it is frankly shocking that so many of our public sector job remain unfilled.
[Guest]: You know, those posts are vacant and that there are so few of them. So it's not just
[Guest]: the fact that we don't have enough jobs, but that there is such an appetite to do jobs
[Guest]: where the financial rewards are not very high. People don't want to worry about the precarity
[Guest]: of, they don't want a lot of money, but they just don't want the precarity of wondering
[Guest]: whether the next salary is going to come from. And in return, they're willing to put their
[Guest]: energies into running things. So I know the public sector gets bashed a lot with, oh,
[Guest]: you know, they just pocket the salary and sit at home. And of course that happens. You
[Guest]: know, one sees that a lot. It happens in my research village. There were two men in the
[Guest]: PWD and I always found them at home, you know, and they always got their salaries. Of course,
[Guest]: they never were out there doing their jobs. But for people like that, I think there are
[Guest]: more people out there who do work hard. And India's civil society space, which is becoming
[Guest]: so unbelievably difficult because it is exactly the space that has the potential, not for
[Guest]: any ideological reasons, but just because of who they are, because civil society is
[Guest]: modelled on cooperation, on diversity of opinion, on privileging capacity over rank. The way
[Guest]: you build anything in civil society is precisely against the principles of majoritarianism
[Guest]: or hegemonic Hindutva. And so civil society, by the nature of its activity, is able to
[Guest]: ask questions of the dominant political ideology in the country. And that's why they're under
[Guest]: attack. The government, I mean, there is an agenda to squeeze them out. But yet, look
[Guest]: at, I mean, India's stories of people making their little corner of India a better place
[Guest]: are countless. So I think we do have that capacity. We just need to make a lot more
[Guest]: of it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And maybe just thinking aloud, it shows up in different places than it used to. Like
[Amit Varma]: I once wrote a column about that hoary question people sometimes ask that, you know, our founders,
[Amit Varma]: in a sense, were all such remarkable men and women. And, you know, where are our leaders
[Amit Varma]: today in comparison? And my point there was that if you just apply the economic lens to
[Amit Varma]: it and look at incentives, right, our founders, when they were fighting for India's freedom,
[Amit Varma]: you know, they weren't motivated by the lust for power because there was none to be had,
[Amit Varma]: right? They were fighting against the great British Empire. Defeat was practically guaranteed.
[Amit Varma]: But because they believed in those principles so much, they threw themselves into it. So
[Amit Varma]: you have that entire generation of great leaders, one upon another, your Gandhi, Patel, Nehru
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth. And today it's different. Today you have this predatory state and anyone
[Amit Varma]: entering politics, given the game that it is, is, you know, largely motivated by the
[Amit Varma]: lust for power. And even if idealistic people get in, they just get corrupted along the
[Amit Varma]: way because that's just the nature of the beast. So where do the idealists go? The idealists
[Amit Varma]: go and, you know, do things within civil society, the kind of things you mentioned, trying to,
[Amit Varma]: you know, make people's lives better in different ways. So I imagine, you know, if Nehru and
[Amit Varma]: Patel were alive today, I really don't think they'd bother with politics, you know, they
[Amit Varma]: do something else somewhere else. But that's an aside. Another sort of question that struck
[Amit Varma]: me when...
[Guest]: Can I just say something to that? I mean, I think it's also, you know, it's quite sad
[Guest]: that our understanding and use of the word politics has become reduced to a zero-sum
[Guest]: game of competition. One of the things I, you know, as an academic would like to push
[Guest]: more, and I'm writing about this, developing on cultivating democracy, is that politics
[Guest]: is as much about building solidarities. That is also politics. Politics is not just about
[Guest]: competition, it's about cooperation, it's about solidarity, it's about learning to work
[Guest]: with others, it is learning to agree to disagree but pull together. This is also politics.
[Guest]: And if you begin to see that, then civil society may not be party political, but it is political
[Guest]: in that life-affirming way. And I think we should expand our notion or we should not
[Guest]: concede politics to be only what corrupt leaders do.
[Amit Varma]: No, absolutely. I was thinking of it in a narrow sense of electoral politics and so
[Amit Varma]: on and so forth. So you're absolutely right. I mean, in a sense, what you and I are doing
[Amit Varma]: right now is politics. So, you know, in a different kind of way. So my next question
[Amit Varma]: comes from that observation you made about how when you went to the Andamans, and you
[Amit Varma]: could suddenly see that these are people who are, you know, not like you, they are a different
[Amit Varma]: kind of people. And you can see the Indian state's attitude towards these people, you
[Amit Varma]: know, especially, you know, like in your, you know, musing about your father's hypothetical
[Amit Varma]: question of why were these guys going there in the first place and imposing themselves
[Amit Varma]: on the local people, right? And I would imagine that that's like one scale dropping from the
[Amit Varma]: AI. And I just kind of look at how I learned to think about India that obviously, when
[Amit Varma]: you're growing up, it's your country of full of patriotism and blah, blah, blah. And then
[Amit Varma]: gradually and the patriotism and the love for the country can remain, but you begin
[Amit Varma]: to notice one layer at a time, all the different things that are wrong with it, how our society
[Amit Varma]: treats women, for example, then, you know, things like caste, things like communalism,
[Amit Varma]: all of them, you begin to notice those layers drop off. At a later point in time, you may
[Amit Varma]: begin to question sort of line nationalism, the lines on a map, you know, must I think
[Amit Varma]: of my country as this? What is the cost of it to be this? You know, when I've, you know,
[Amit Varma]: done episodes on that part of India's history, where this nation kind of came together, you
[Amit Varma]: know, 47 to 50, like an episode I did on VP Menon and how he helped Sardar Patel, you
[Amit Varma]: know, get it together, it seems to me to be an act of fast-track colonialism, what the
[Amit Varma]: British took a couple of centuries to do, these two guys using coercion and promises
[Amit Varma]: that they later broke, essentially, you know, created this political entity. Now, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I love this country as it stands now, but I can't help but look back and feel, you know,
[Amit Varma]: deep unease at the means through which we, you know, achieved this particular end. So
[Amit Varma]: I've, you know, through my life just started questioning so much, one layer at a time,
[Amit Varma]: all these layers kind of drop off. And of course, today, I think, you know, there shouldn't
[Amit Varma]: be any more layers left to follow, fall away. But in your case, how did your notion of India
[Amit Varma]: sort of gradually evolve? Because I would imagine as a child, of course, of idealistic
[Amit Varma]: parents and all of that, you look at this country as a great project, your idea of India,
[Amit Varma]: I presume your inherited idea of India, received idea of India would be very similar to what
[Amit Varma]: Nehru's would have been. But then you look around and, you know, so tell me about that
[Amit Varma]: process of coming from that idealized notion of India to the real India that we see around
[Amit Varma]: that. What was that process like? You know, what were the, you know, what were the sort
[Amit Varma]: of the revelations of the TILs that kind of really made you sit back, that shook you,
[Guest]: so on and so forth?
[Guest]: Okay, so that, you know, I think being in Port Blair during the 1971 war was interesting
[Guest]: because we used to have blackouts and my mother and all other women and others were making
[Guest]: up food packets and knitting stuff and, you know, the usual kind of war effort. And we
[Guest]: had no clue what was going on, you know, what this was, until we began to see planes fly
[Guest]: overhead. And India's aircraft carrier INS Vikrant came by and docked. It couldn't come
[Guest]: into the harbour because it was too big, so it stopped mid-sea. And we were taken out
[Guest]: to be on it. And so suddenly you begin to realise as a very small child that there were
[Guest]: this enormous machinery to protect the sovereignty of one's country and that somehow India was
[Guest]: in this just war fighting to liberate another country. And actually East Pakistan was not
[Guest]: even a word that was used very much. It became Bangladesh very quickly. And of course there's
[Guest]: a big Bengali population in Port Blair that's local to it, Bengali and Punjabis. These were
[Guest]: the two big communities settled there. So Bangladeshi and what Bangladeshi liberation
[Guest]: meant, the rights and wrongs of it, the importance of language and not curbing, not imposing
[Guest]: languages and the consequences of imposing Urdu on a Bengali speaking population. Look
[Guest]: what happens. That message came through even to a very small child at that point. And that
[Guest]: the Indian state had the sheer muscle power of something like INS Vikrant to press into
[Guest]: service to defend these principles. So obviously you felt incredibly loyal and patriotic about
[Guest]: it. But then, you know, asking questions about why we were in Chakrata and why were India
[Guest]: and Pakistan fighting and that relationship raised a whole set of issues around Pakistan,
[Guest]: which obviously, you know, stayed with me and determined my first project. But actually
[Guest]: the warts of this country that one belonged to were almost at every social interaction.
[Guest]: You know, what we don't talk about, you think, well, I was as privileged as they come as
[Guest]: being born into a Brahmin Bengali educated family. Of course, you're female. So that's
[Guest]: one disadvantage. Instantly, I told you the story about where do you have a brother? And
[Guest]: the second thing of being dark skinned, you know, and we don't talk about very much in
[Guest]: sociological terms very much, but, you know, it explains Indians' racism towards darker
[Guest]: races all over the world and in India all the time. But look at the way we treat each
[Guest]: other. I mean, so the fact that through non-verbal violence, you can destroy the self-belief
[Guest]: of young women because they are dark skinned. Men too, but, you know, the redeeming feature
[Guest]: is that they're male. So you can be forgiven much. It doesn't matter how tall you are or
[Guest]: how dark you are. But if you're not very tall and you're dark in Indian society and a woman,
[Guest]: you spend a lot of effort trying to overcome those disadvantages. So that was one big thing.
[Guest]: The caste thing, which again was never, that is what happens when you live in a Brahmin
[Guest]: household, right? You never think about it unless you start to see the inequities around
[Guest]: you and then you begin to understand that they are shaped by caste. I mean, why, you
[Guest]: know, in a government bungalow that we lived in, when the drains got blocked, why did another
[Guest]: human being have to come in and climb into those ancient colonial drains to clear them?
[Guest]: And I remember thinking, I remember being appalled, not just by the ickiness of it,
[Guest]: but just thinking, you know, here was this guy who was standing here one minute talking
[Guest]: to me, next thing, and I used to often, you know, take charge of things like this getting
[Guest]: done in the house that, you know, just, it didn't seem right. And learning to then think
[Guest]: what this was structured by. And then living in, you know, living, as I said, next to Old
[Guest]: Delhi and understanding, you know, to be part of this very normalized routine where there
[Guest]: were mosques all around. There was a mosque right behind our house. So, you know, before
[Guest]: exams you had to get up to do revision. You woke up with the dawn azan. In the evening
[Guest]: you had to come in from playing outside before the evening azan. You know, so our lives used
[Guest]: to be regulated by the azan. And suddenly to have bastis being destroyed because they
[Guest]: were Muslim was, these were the ruptures, you know, the moments where you think, you
[Guest]: stop and think about what you've taken completely for granted and you ask questions, some of
[Guest]: which are answered, some of which are not answered. And it sets up all those questions
[Guest]: that you spend then time trying to understand. And almost, like I said, every encounter whether
[Guest]: amongst people you knew or using public transport as we did, you know, I joined the NCC so the
[Guest]: only way I could be in the NCC and stay behind was, you know, I couldn't come back on the
[Guest]: school bus, so I had to come back on a public bus. And, you know, you're fair game on a
[Guest]: DTC bus and we used to be fair game. Every single time we got on a DTC bus, you had no
[Guest]: idea who was, what kind of man was going to be stood next to you. And you kind of put
[Guest]: up with it because you put up with it because you saw everybody else putting up with it
[Guest]: until one day you thought, hang on a second, why should I be putting up with this nonsense
[Guest]: and did something about it. So whether it was polite conversation, whether it was public
[Guest]: transport, whether it was the political speeches one heard at Ramlila Maidan all the time,
[Guest]: you know, so the greats, JP, Jayaprakash Narayan, Raj Narayan, Atal Bihari Bajpai, they all
[Guest]: used to come. This was where you made your big political speeches. And one heard them
[Guest]: all at all these, you know, every one of these encounters threw up questions about that made
[Guest]: you question, not just the status quo, but question what you were taking for granted.
[Guest]: It just made you think, oh, hang on a second, this is not right. And maybe this is why it
[Guest]: is not right. And so much of the excellent education one had in Delhi University was
[Guest]: really learning to ask and answer those questions, learning to know how to ask the question,
[Guest]: learning to ask the right questions. You know, that's what university education is about.
[Guest]: And now when I, you know, this obsession that we have in India, as indeed elsewhere, with
[Guest]: the STEM subjects in science and technology and mathematics, which are, of course, all
[Guest]: brilliant and, you know, they make rocket fuel and tell us about Mars and built the
[Guest]: internet, fantastic disciplines, all of them. But what the social sciences and humanities
[Guest]: do is to help you understand and ask those the right questions, and then how to think
[Guest]: with those questions, what to read, how to read, ask those questions. And that's why
[Guest]: often when you look at right wing trolls, you find they are IT techie guys, you know,
[Guest]: and that's what is missing in that kind of technical STEM education.
[Amit Varma]: So speaking of the social sciences and asking questions and all that, tell me a little bit
[Amit Varma]: more about your journey then, you know, as a young teenager, you're noticing all these
[Amit Varma]: things, you're going to college, you're, you know, presumably, though I would still imagine
[Amit Varma]: that if you're asking questions about all of this, you're still one of the outliers,
[Amit Varma]: everyone isn't quite like this yet. But, you know, so is that true, number one? And also
[Amit Varma]: how is then your journey happening to, you know, are you like, were you an accidental
[Amit Varma]: anthropologist? Or did you at some point, start finding the whole field fascinating
[Amit Varma]: and said, okay, this is what I want to do.
[Guest]: Okay, so I think I am an accidental anthropologist, but I found it very, an interesting field
[Guest]: because my first degree was in English honours. When I finished school, I thought I was going
[Guest]: to be a surgeon, like my father. I loved being in a white coat and making people better.
[Amit Varma]: Cutting bodies open.
[Guest]: Yes, I used to love, you know, I used to love pinning a chloroformed frog down and dissecting
[Guest]: it and doing rat dissections. I used to love it. I did A-level science. But for various
[Guest]: complicated reasons, I never made it through the medical entrance and couldn't get into
[Guest]: medical college and was heartbroken. But again, I had very enlightened parents and who pointed
[Guest]: out to me that actually my second love was English literature. It wasn't a sort of replacement
[Guest]: science subject like zoology or botany. You know, that's what people did if you didn't
[Guest]: get into medicine. And so I went off to study English honours and flourished. I did very
[Guest]: well. Loved, absolutely loved reading what we read in the curriculum, which was admittedly
[Guest]: not a very decolonised curriculum at all. You know, in the 80s, English honours in Delhi
[Guest]: University was as canonised, canonical English books as you can imagine. And, you know, it's
[Guest]: quite right that it has been revised since then. But we started in a very classical,
[Guest]: we read Plautus and Plato and Homer and then moved down through the centuries through Chaucer
[Guest]: and Milton and Shakespeare, of course, and then the 20th century greats. I loved these
[Guest]: books. An additional, what really made, I think, my three years of English honours was
[Guest]: discovering Samuel Beckett's plays in the very first month of starting my degree in
[Guest]: the college library and being blown out of my mind, you know, by this play that Beckett
[Guest]: has called Play. It's called Play. And I was looking for a play to perform for the
[Guest]: Freshers Drama Competition and I did a lot of theatre in those days and found this play
[Guest]: and then discovered Beckett. But that was a whole other journey. But alongside reading
[Guest]: these texts, we also had to do what were called historical background. So if you were reading,
[Guest]: say, Jonathan Swift, you needed to know what was happening in 17th, 18th century England
[Guest]: at the time. And I found those background papers very interesting. And so when I came
[Guest]: to the end of my three years and I did very well and topped the university and so on,
[Guest]: I thought, OK, I'm going to always read books. And I still, to this day, every single
[Guest]: day I read some fiction and I read literature quite as much as I can. But those social
[Guest]: backgrounds, they were sociological. And that's what interested me, I realised. And in those
[Guest]: days and possibly even now in Delhi University, you could not do a master's in any subject
[Guest]: unless you had a first degree in that subject, except for sociology. So sociology in the
[Guest]: Delhi School of Economics was the only place where they would have an all India entrance
[Guest]: test and give you some fairly general questions to answer. You wrote a couple of essays and
[Guest]: then they took 35 people. So and they admitted people on that basis. And I got in there.
[Guest]: And that's when I started to study sociology, which in those days, the sociology department
[Guest]: in Delhi School was at its heyday. You know, so it had the greats. This was the department
[Guest]: that M. N. Srinivas had set up. But Srinivas was gone. But we had Ajit Pal Singh Oberoi,
[Guest]: Andre Bete, Veena Das, A. M. Shah, B. S. Bhavaskar. These were the people who were teaching and
[Guest]: they taught. They had a real sense of mission. We had a real range of research interests
[Guest]: and they were captivating. Abhidhav Ghosh, that was his last year of teaching sociology.
[Guest]: So he taught me in that first year. And then he wrote The Circle of Reason and became terribly
[Guest]: famous and quite rightly gave up teaching anthropology to writing fiction, full time
[Guest]: writing, not just fiction, full time. But that was what was, you know, we had sociology
[Guest]: of India papers when for the first time one was reading about India, reading about village
[Guest]: India, reading about caste India, reading about social stratification and, you know,
[Guest]: social inequality. I mean, someone like Bete who had spent his entire career writing about
[Guest]: inequality. So that's when we got the, or I certainly developed the analytical language
[Guest]: to talk about what I could see, you know, the things that I was talking about earlier.
[Guest]: But when it came to just to anticipate the next stage was I left and I did my MPhil there
[Guest]: as well. But when it came to doing a PhD, I was very happy to stay and do my PhD there.
[Guest]: But by that point, Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan had died in January, 1988, 20th January. And
[Guest]: we were finishing our masters and doing this wonderful course that Professor Oberoi taught
[Guest]: on Southwest Asia, which was effectively, you know, what Euro-America calls the Middle
[Guest]: East. And we were reading all this anthropology of Pashtuns and Pathan country and Afghanistan
[Guest]: and so on. Frederick Barth, Akbar Ahmed, these were people who'd written about, these were
[Guest]: anthropologists of. And we read about blood feuds and Gherat, this incredible Pathan notion
[Guest]: of courage, Bukhtunwali, the sort of cultural code through which they regulate their social
[Guest]: systems. And in the middle of this, Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan died. And the Indian newspapers
[Guest]: were, of course, full of, oh, this is Frontier Gandhi, Sarhadi Gandhi, nonviolent soldier
[Guest]: of Islam. And, you know, A Man to Match His Mountains was the name of this book. And,
[Guest]: you know, Fakhri Afghan, the Afghans used to call him. And it struck me as very odd
[Guest]: that the anthropological literature on the Pathans and the day's headlines were in complete
[Guest]: variance. You know, how could you have a Pashtun from a society where blood feuds were such
[Guest]: a big thing being nonviolent? You know, what the hell was going on?
[Guest]: So I remember asking Professor Oberoi about this. And he said, oh, think about it some
[Guest]: more. And I said, no, I want to write an op-ed piece and send it to the Times of India and
[Guest]: see if they'll, you know, isn't it interesting? And he said, no, no, just go away and think
[Guest]: about it some more. So I thought about it some more. I said, OK, let me read what's
[Guest]: there on the Khudai Khidmatgar movement. What was this movement that he set up? And there
[Guest]: was nothing. There was no book I could read that would tell me about the Khudai Khidmatgar
[Guest]: movement. And what I found was Tendulkar's biography of Bacha Khan, which was the sort
[Guest]: of appendix to his multi-volume biography of Gandhi. And that was very much how, you
[Guest]: know, so it was slightly hagiographical and it was, you know, Frontier Gandhi and it was
[Guest]: amazing and he did this and that. But there was some interesting historical detail there,
[Guest]: no question. But what by then, my sociological muscle had been developed enough for me to
[Guest]: be interested not in just in the big leader theories of society, but how the ordinary
[Guest]: Khudai Khidmatgar had managed being Muslim, being a Pashtun, being a man and being non-violent.
[Guest]: You know, it seemed like a cultural joke that you could have the most successful Gandhian
[Guest]: movement for 17 years from 1930 to 1947 amongst the Pashtuns. It was just bizarre because,
[Guest]: you know, what we'd heard of in popular culture was, of course, Kabuliwala based on Tagore's
[Guest]: story and, you know, so on. And the film and my father had stories of Kabuliwalas used
[Guest]: to come and sell, you know, dried fruits and all in places like Gwalior or Ittar, you know,
[Guest]: they used to come and refill my grandfather's Ittar bottles once a year. There was nothing.
[Guest]: So that's when I realised that I had to, I really wanted to find out more. And the only
[Guest]: way to do it was to do a PhD. But my brilliant professors at Delhi School in those days,
[Guest]: I guess, said, sorry, you can't go to Pakistan. That's not possible. I said, why not? And
[Guest]: they said, because you're Indian and because you're Hindu and, you know, there's a war
[Guest]: going on in Afghanistan and you'll get killed. I said, well, that's up to me, right? I should
[Guest]: be able to take a chance. No, no, Indians can't go in there. I said, why have Indians
[Guest]: been turned down before? Has anyone tried and been told they can't go? And they said,
[Guest]: no, but there's no question. You just won't get the permission to go. At which point I
[Guest]: realised that I was not going to be able to talk myself out through this. So I left. I
[Guest]: left Delhi School of Economics and hoped to then get a scholarship to go abroad. And while
[Guest]: I did, I actually I did the best thing I could have done with my time, which was to go and
[Guest]: work with Kapila Vatsyayan in the Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts in Delhi.
[Amit Varma]: Wow, what a story. And you know, you mentioned Beckett earlier, and I thought you're surely
[Amit Varma]: going to mention Waiting for Godot. And that involves a lot of waiting. So that's, you
[Amit Varma]: know, could prepare you for a life in ethnography. Hang around 10-15 years and see how these
[Amit Varma]: people live their lives. And you also mentioned, you know, cutting of frogs, which is something
[Amit Varma]: I could never do. But I remembered this beautiful quote by Asimov, which is apropos of nothing,
[Amit Varma]: but I'm going to read it out anyway, because there's a memorable phrase in this quote,
[Amit Varma]: which really struck me. And this is Isaac Asimov saying, quote, I could not endure zoology.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, I would have done well enough if it were a mere matter of book learning, but it wasn't.
[Amit Varma]: There was a lab and we dissected earthworms, frogs, dogfish and cats. I disliked it intensely,
[Amit Varma]: but I grew inured to it. The trouble was that we had to find a stray cat and kill it by
[Amit Varma]: dumping it in an ash can which we filled with chloroform. Like a fool, I did it. After all,
[Amit Varma]: I was only following the orders of my superior, like any Nazi functionary in the death camps.
[Amit Varma]: But I never recovered. That killed cat lives with me. And to this day, over half a century
[Amit Varma]: later, when I think of it, I double up in misery. Stop quote. And which is such a, you
[Amit Varma]: know, such a...
[Guest]: Wow, that's, no, I don't, I think I'm with Asimov on that. I don't think I could have
[Guest]: killed even a frog to have cut it up. But once it had been dissociated, and as Elliot
[Guest]: would say, like a patient etherized upon the table, you know, once it was there on the
[Guest]: wax thing, then, you know, then it was a, it was a procedure that you learnt and learnt
[Guest]: how to pin it down, so to speak. And then it became, it was like looking through a telescope
[Guest]: into the night sky. It was looking into the organs of a mammal. So, you knew that there
[Guest]: was enough mirroring, you know, there was something of you that you learnt as well,
[Guest]: not just about that. But you learn something about yourself. I mean, I would have never
[Guest]: known I was not squeamish until I began to do dissections. And unlike Asimov, I think
[Guest]: I wouldn't have ever studied science if there wasn't so much practical work in each of the
[Guest]: three subjects.
[Amit Varma]: You know, in that bit I read out, I love that, you know, that line, that killed cat lives
[Amit Varma]: with me. And question to all my listeners that, you know, are there killed cats which
[Amit Varma]: live with you also? Something to think about. And just speaking of, you know, the frog being
[Amit Varma]: already dead, I am reminded, and this is another digression, I am reminded of Leo Tolstoy,
[Amit Varma]: who in his later years had turned militantly vegetarian and was an inspiration to Gandhi
[Amit Varma]: for various reasons. And one day his aunt said, you know, I'm coming home for, I'm coming
[Amit Varma]: home for lunch and I'd like to have some chicken. And he said, you know, we're a vegetarian
[Amit Varma]: household and all that. And she's like, no, no, I want chicken, I insist on chicken. So
[Amit Varma]: when she came, she was taken to the dining table and there was a chicken on her chair,
[Amit Varma]: a live chicken. And he said, okay, you kill it and eat it. And it's a very interesting
[Amit Varma]: way for Tolstoy to point out that the chicken on the chair is going to be the chicken on
[Amit Varma]: the plate. So, you know, I could say the same thing about the frogs.
[Guest]: But you know, on that, Amit, there's a couple of things one can say from that digression.
[Guest]: One is a very funny story in The Nautilus Frontier about being vegetarian. And the other
[Guest]: one is a more profound one about killing and consuming animals you love, which is the essence
[Guest]: of Qurbani in Islam. And I write about that in some detail. I have a whole chapter on
[Guest]: that in my latest book. But let me tell you the funny story first. So when I arrived in
[Guest]: The Nautilus Frontier, finally, I was staying in Wali Khan's house. Wali Khan was one of
[Guest]: Bacha Khan's three sons and they were very hospitable. And Wali Baba basically just took
[Guest]: me, he made me his fourth daughter. He had three daughters and he said, now I have four
[Guest]: sons. And the first evening I sat down to dinner with them and they said, Mukulika,
[Guest]: you're vegetarian. We thought if you're coming from India, maybe you're vegetarian. And I
[Guest]: said, no, I'm not vegetarian, but it's fine. You know, if there's vegetarian food, I'll
[Guest]: eat it very happily. So we sat down and we used to sit around together on this floor
[Guest]: with a sandali, it's called in Pashto. You sit with your feet tucked into this lovely
[Guest]: toasty oven and the table is, you sit around it on the floor. And the food began to come
[Guest]: in and, you know, these were aristocratic landlords. So there were lots of servants
[Guest]: bringing in fresh bread from the tandoor and various dishes. And I couldn't see anything
[Guest]: vegetarian. So, you know, after about 10 minutes, I said, I'm happy to eat the vegetarian food.
[Guest]: Please, I'll eat it up. And the whole family looked at me shocked and they said, but it's
[Guest]: on the table. You know, there's the daal. And I said, yeah, but this daal has keema
[Guest]: in it, you know, so I'll have the daal. It's like, yeah, but it's daal, it's vegetarian.
[Guest]: So there was the notion that you can cook anything without putting a little bit of keema,
[Guest]: a little bit of meat in it, was just completely strange. So that was the idea of vegetarian.
[Guest]: But I think Wali Khan was also very happy to, he loved telling the story about his conversation
[Guest]: with Gandhi when he was young, where he told Gandhiji, you go on about nonviolence, but
[Guest]: what, how can you teach nonviolence to a mother hen who's trying to protect her chick from
[Guest]: the butcher who's coming to kill it for the evening meal? And what good is your nonviolence
[Guest]: at that point? And so, of course, you know, we talked about nonviolence after that, Wali
[Guest]: Baba, but it was very much this, exactly this metaphor that he used about chicken and eating
[Guest]: and killing. But that's why I also think, that was the other reason why I began to eat
[Guest]: beef for the first time in the frontier, which obviously, you know, like most of us, many
[Guest]: of us growing up in India, even if you're non-vegetarian, you don't eat beef, not upper
[Guest]: caste Hindus anyway.
[Guest]: But in the frontier, beef was the poor man's meat. That was what was plentifully available.
[Guest]: And you killed a chicken for special guests and for a special, you know, a guest show.
[Guest]: And their idea of hospitality is off the scale. It is, we haven't seen anything like it in
[Guest]: most other parts of the world. So, if you just arrive in somebody's house, you know,
[Guest]: and they'll, of course, assume you will stay for the next meal whenever it is and so on.
[Guest]: And I realized that if I said I won't eat beef, they would kill the only chicken that
[Guest]: they're saving for a special occasion. And I was traveling up and down the frontier province
[Guest]: looking for these old khudai khidmatgars, you know, going to very, very poor households.
[Guest]: And they didn't have a lot of money. And I knew that their norms of hospitality would
[Guest]: mean that they would not think for a minute that there was a guest and they would kill
[Guest]: the chicken. So, I began to eat beef. And so, it seemed the most human thing to do.
[Guest]: So, when I came back from Pakistan and I met my grandmother, my paternal grandmother, who's
[Guest]: to live with us a lot, and I had to confess to her, I said, I have to tell you, I've been
[Guest]: eating beef there. And she said, I see. And she was, you know, she was a widow in white
[Guest]: and kept all her fasts and, you know, denied herself in the way that Brahminical widows
[Guest]: are expected to do in that very violent, cruel way. But of course, you know, lived her religious
[Guest]: life according to the azan from the mosque behind our house and never turned up, never
[Guest]: thought anything of all this Eid food coming in and out of the house. And she asked me,
[Guest]: she said, why did you eat beef? So, I explained what I just said to you. And she said, well,
[Guest]: that's good, you did, because you did it out of humanity. And that is surely more important
[Guest]: than some rules that you've been brought up with. And so, you know, I had not thought
[Guest]: anything of that. You know, I love my grandmother and that made me love her even more. And I
[Guest]: was relieved. But these are quite, these are, you know, my grandmother was no radical. But
[Guest]: I dare say that this also is Hindu society in India. And she wasn't an exception. And
[Guest]: this kind of humanity, this kind of accommodation, this kind of keeping your eye on the big picture,
[Guest]: you know, that innate sense that she had. This is what is widely held by so many people.
[Guest]: And this is what is being destroyed at the moment in India. This sense that let's keep
[Guest]: a perspective on what we are being dogmatic about, for heaven's sake.
[Amit Varma]: This is such a beautiful, evocative story. So, thank you for that. But I can't imagine
[Amit Varma]: why, you know, you would give chicken to special guests. Like, I eat everything, but I love
[Amit Varma]: beef, you know. I just ask for the beef. The special guest should get the beef, you know.
[Amit Varma]: But anyway, leaving that aside, you know, so before we go into the break, and after
[Amit Varma]: the break, we'll come back and continue with your time, you know, writing the Pathan Anand.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, you know, another question that occurs is when you mentioned that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, your advisors and all that, they felt squeamish, they didn't feel that they wanted
[Amit Varma]: you to go. And one reason, of course, is that, you know, will an Indian be given a visa by
[Amit Varma]: Pakistan. But the other reason also would have been your gender. Like, you know, you
[Amit Varma]: mentioned earlier that you met Nirupa Marao and you heard my episode with her. And even
[Amit Varma]: she talks about how, you know, when it came to choosing the foreign service, they were
[Amit Varma]: like thinking that, oh, is this the right profession for a woman? You know, she might
[Amit Varma]: have to go to the airport at an odd time to receive a diplomat. And is she up to it? I
[Amit Varma]: remember a long time back, I did an episode on Me Too with the caravan journalist Nikita
[Amit Varma]: Saxena. And she was talking about how when she would go to report remote stories, you
[Amit Varma]: know, in small towns and all that, there would be all kinds of problems that would be there
[Amit Varma]: for women that would not matter to the men. For example, hotel doors, which you cannot
[Amit Varma]: actually, you don't have a separate latch from the inside. You have the regular thing
[Amit Varma]: you turn, but you don't have a separate latch from the inside. And someone like me would
[Amit Varma]: not think twice, you know, just shut the door and go to sleep. But for women, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: it's something you need to think about. It's an extra layer. And despite that, they would
[Amit Varma]: want to go because that's the job they want to do. So, you know, in that sense, even within
[Amit Varma]: a field where you'd expect more progressive values to, you know, be present, you know,
[Amit Varma]: what's that a thought? Because ethnography, for example, anthropology requires that you
[Amit Varma]: go out, you live among the people, you do all of that. So was it harder for women than
[Amit Varma]: for men? And is that changing if so?
[Guest]: It depends on where the women are going and what kind of choices they make. And I think
[Guest]: this is as much a gender thing as well as an age thing. It, you know, which is a separate
[Guest]: issue completely. It's where people are doing their second projects, you know, and third
[Guest]: projects. And we'll talk about that later. But going back to that conversation, you're
[Guest]: absolutely right. I doubt if I was a young man, I would have been summarily told that
[Guest]: this was impossible. And all I was, in fact, arguing for was that I try to go to Pakistan.
[Guest]: And if I was denied permission, we could now say going forward that an Indian tried and
[Guest]: was denied permission. And this was now on record. Nobody else had done this before.
[Guest]: And I would come back and do my PhD on something else or not at all, because the only reason
[Guest]: I wanted to do a PhD was to study this movement. You know, I wasn't interested per se in writing
[Guest]: a PhD. But they made this, they said it was impossible. And in fact, the clincher was
[Guest]: when one of them said to me, when they realized that I wasn't, they were not going to change
[Guest]: my mind, one of them actually said to me, Mukulika, this is such a great idea. Do you
[Guest]: think if it was possible, one of us wouldn't have done it by now?
[Guest]: And I thought, okay, I've probably outstayed my time here. It's time to move on somewhere
[Guest]: else. Because there was so much paternalism, arrogance, chauvinism, intellectual, I don't
[Guest]: know what in it that, you know, and this is where it didn't entirely surprise me, because
[Guest]: this was the kind of conversations my mother would have with us. And, you know, my three
[Guest]: sisters, my two sisters and I and my mother, we would have these conversations about how
[Guest]: perfectly well-educated, progressive, seemingly progressive people we knew could be ultimately,
[Guest]: when push came to shove, incredibly narrow-minded. So, suddenly you become a female and an intelligent
[Guest]: female aspiring to do something above her pay grade was unacceptable. That if it was
[Guest]: so good, it would have been done by somebody else, by us, you know, venerable men. So,
[Guest]: it didn't entirely surprise me, but it did shock me nevertheless, that this really indeed
[Guest]: was the case, that this is how the world worked.
[Guest]: I suppose the contrast, I also did not appreciate at the time just how mad an idea it was, you
[Guest]: know, to want to go to Pakistan. We didn't know anyone. I wasn't even going to the Punjab.
[Guest]: I had absolutely no clue, but I had, you know, and I literally lost sleep at night thinking
[Guest]: about it. And, you know, my professor, Jeet Oberoi, who's to teach us, if anyone wanted
[Guest]: to do a PhD and went up to him and said, Sir, I want to do a PhD with you. And his question
[Guest]: to such students used to be, can you sleep well at night? And if the answer was yes,
[Guest]: he said, you don't need to do a PhD. It should keep you up at night, your problem. And that's
[Guest]: when I realized how obsessed I was with, you know, wanting to do this. And the fact that
[Guest]: at home, literally there was not even half a conversation about the fact that I might
[Guest]: not be approved to be doing this. You know, there was no question. You want to do this,
[Guest]: you find a way, we can't help you. And, you know, my parents were certainly not plugged
[Guest]: into the sort of diplomatic cocktail circuit or, you know, they weren't part of that sort
[Guest]: of what is now called Latins Delhi, but, you know, the power elite of Delhi, they were
[Guest]: not at all part of that. But they said, if you can find a way, absolutely, you know,
[Guest]: why not? And that was unusual. I think, you know, not many households would have said
[Guest]: that. So you ask whether it is getting easier. I think it depends very much on the individual
[Guest]: and how committed they are to making it happen and what constraints they're working with.
[Guest]: So whatever kind of constraints, there is money, there is families, there is, you know,
[Guest]: all kinds of other constraints. What I noticed and what I was going to say about age is that
[Guest]: with anthropologists, since you're asking about the discipline, you also begin to see
[Guest]: a very clear division amongst anthropologists of doing the brave, adventurous, intrepid
[Guest]: fieldwork for the first project when you're young and in your 20s often. But with marriage,
[Guest]: parenthood, age, creature comforts, salaries, people begin to do fieldwork in, you know,
[Guest]: urban settings, there's suddenly urban India studied a lot more than village India. And
[Guest]: so I think the second project of starting out studying a village very far from where
[Guest]: I knew anything was, again, another instance in which it was issue driven. You know, in
[Guest]: every case, all my projects have been the result of being intrigued by a question and
[Guest]: then doing whatever it takes to try and answer it. So the cultural joke of how can you have
[Guest]: a bunch of Muslim Pashtun men pull off the most successful Gandhian movement in the world,
[Guest]: that was the question that drove it. And the democracy work was very much driven by that
[Guest]: question is why do poor people in villages vote more than anyone else? And then you do
[Guest]: what it takes to answer that question. That's what research is.
[Amit Varma]: I just love that question. Professor Oberoi asked you, do you sleep well at night? That's
[Amit Varma]: such a lovely sort of metric to examine sort of the things that you should do. So let's,
[Amit Varma]: you know, take a quick commercial break and on the other side of the break, we'll continue
[Amit Varma]: this conversation. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer, but never quite gotten down to it? Well, I'd love
[Amit Varma]: to help you. Since April 2020, I've taught 20 cohorts of my online course, The Art of
[Amit Varma]: Clear Writing. An online community has now sprung up of all my past students. We have
[Amit Varma]: workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students and vibrant community interaction.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know
[Amit Varma]: about the craft and practice of clear writing. There are many exercises, much interaction,
[Amit Varma]: a lovely and lively community at the end of it. The course costs rupees 10,000 plus GST
[Amit Varma]: or about $150 and is a monthly thing. So if you're interested, head on over to register
[Amit Varma]: at IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing. That's IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing. Being
[Amit Varma]: a good writer doesn't require God given talent, just the willingness to work hard and a clear
[Amit Varma]: idea of what you need to do to refine your skills. I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Mukulika Banerjee about a fascinating
[Amit Varma]: life and a fascinating work and so on and so forth. And I just realized while I'm looking
[Amit Varma]: at my notes that there are a couple of threads where you said you were going to speak about
[Amit Varma]: particular subjects and but, you know, we digressed on to other things. So I'll just
[Amit Varma]: draw your attention back to those. And one of those is, you know, before you told us
[Amit Varma]: about Sister Patricia and last bookcases you mentioned you were going to chat about Delhi.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, quickly, when you mentioned the animals bit, you said you were going to
[Amit Varma]: speak about Qurbani, you know, and all of that. So shall we?
[Guest]: Yeah, we can talk about, I mean, Qurbani, what I was going to say, this is quite a serious
[Guest]: argument and I attempt to link it to an argument on democracy as well. But it's very, you know,
[Guest]: it's a contemporary issue in India at the moment. But Qurbani as a festival, which is
[Guest]: one of the Eids, right, is based on the U. Qurbani, as we know, stands for sacrifice.
[Guest]: And it is about sacrificing an animal. And therefore, one of the caricatures or misunderstandings
[Guest]: of Qurbani is that, oh, it's when Muslims eat meat. Well, it's anything but. And in
[Guest]: places like India and Pakistan, Bangladesh, the animal that is being sacrificed is not
[Guest]: bought. It is one that you've raised. And that is meant to be a genuine Qurbani, is
[Guest]: when you sacrifice an animal that is very precious to you. So it is to mimic the Abrahamic
[Guest]: sacrifice, which is what we are doing here, is that Abraham gave up his son, offered to
[Guest]: give up his son. So you give up an animal. So in my village where I do research, where
[Guest]: mostly everybody is Muslim, I knew people and their animals and their relationship to
[Guest]: their animals, where on Qurbani, I knew that people had given up the one little, the cow
[Guest]: that they were most fond of, had given it an affectionate name, whose fussiness they
[Guest]: knew and would feed them special treats or whatever. People had that kind of intimate
[Guest]: relationship with their animals. And when you give that up, you know what it is to give
[Guest]: up something that is really close to you. According to the rules of Islam, meat from
[Guest]: the sacrificed animal is then divided up into equal portions. You mix it all up. So it's
[Guest]: not even like better cuts of meat are kept for certain parts of the family. You have
[Guest]: those certain rules in other parts of the world. But here you mix up all the meat. You
[Guest]: make it into seven sections. You give away most of them according to rules of kinship
[Guest]: or rules of people you're friends with or neighbours. What you keep for consumption
[Guest]: is a tiny amount. Of course, you receive from other households as well. But in a place like
[Guest]: my research village, where, yes, people were Muslim, but people were too poor to eat any
[Guest]: meat through the year. In fact, they couldn't even get fish. If they had, you know, they
[Guest]: pushed the boat out, they had eggs. So most of the year they were eating a very rice-heavy
[Guest]: diet, maybe some watered-down dal, some vegetables. You know, these were poor villages. So on
[Guest]: Qurbani, when meat was, when animals were sacrificed, it wasn't just the Muslim households
[Guest]: that had offered the sacrifice who ate meat. Everybody in the village got to eat meat.
[Guest]: There was a Baghdi and a Dome communities as well. So there were two low-caste Hindu
[Guest]: ones as well. Everybody got to eat some. So there was this idea of redistribution as well.
[Guest]: So there was plenty and abundance, and yes, these were wealthy Syed households that could
[Guest]: afford to offer an animal, but everybody got to have some. And, you know, there's a very
[Guest]: democratic idea in this, that this is how, for instance, taxation works. You pay tax,
[Guest]: especially direct taxes. You pay income tax or you pay tax on road tax or, you know, property
[Guest]: tax on possessions because it means you have enough money to own these things. But what
[Guest]: the state does with that tax is then make sure that everybody has a certain basic standard
[Guest]: of living. I mean, that's the theory of it anyway. So, you know, what we were talking
[Guest]: about earlier of Tolstoy's, you know, what he made his aunt do, that relationship between
[Guest]: an animal that you've seen alive, killing it and eating it, he's absolutely right. He
[Guest]: made his point very effectively. But that is the power of Qurbani as well. You know
[Guest]: what it is. And I think it's a very powerful idea that Muslims who have practiced Qurbani
[Guest]: like this live with.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, a couple of things. I mean, one, I just make the distinction that, you know, the families
[Amit Varma]: which are distributing the meat to the entire village are doing it voluntarily and taxes
[Amit Varma]: are not voluntary. I mean, one common question that I ask my friends, which is sort of a
[Amit Varma]: philosophical question, is that when the regime in power is what it is, where we essentially
[Amit Varma]: live under a state which is not, you know, protective or productive, but predatory, you
[Amit Varma]: know, to use James Buchanan's terms, is it then moral to give some of your labor, some
[Amit Varma]: of your money to this oppressive regime, which is using it to do whatever they do with bulldozers,
[Amit Varma]: which is, you know, a separate thought experiment. I am, of course, a law-abiding citizen. I
[Amit Varma]: pay all my taxes and too much of it. And even this sort of notion of, you know, killing
[Amit Varma]: an animal you love just so that you know, so that you feel the pain. I don't know, it
[Amit Varma]: somehow doesn't sit well with me. I mean, the part of the story which I love is that
[Amit Varma]: they're sharing it with everyone in the village and that's great across caste and whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But it just seems very brutal, especially if you're a kid in the family and you've grown
[Amit Varma]: to love an animal and then you see it being sacrificed like this. Like, you know, I love
[Amit Varma]: dogs, but one of the reasons we haven't got a dog is because, you know, mentally, I know
[Amit Varma]: that I'm likely to outlive a dog and I don't want that pain at the end of it when it dies
[Guest]: a natural death. Right. So maybe I think one has to remember that you in this case, yes,
[Guest]: you love your animal, but you love Allah more. And what you're proving precisely is that
[Guest]: you love Allah so much that you can give up your most prized possession, you're willing
[Guest]: to give it up. That's the real test. So that's the theology behind it. And of course, you
[Guest]: know, one has, you can understand or not up to a point and certainly you can understand
[Guest]: but not agree with certain philosophical theological positions.
[Guest]: About taxation, I mean, I am interested because this is going to be my next body of research,
[Guest]: which I'm just starting now. India is a very curious case. You know, India has a big tax
[Guest]: gap given its GDP, the size of its economy and its tax revenues. And looking into it,
[Guest]: it's quite extraordinary. I mean, to start with, almost as a social scientist working
[Guest]: on India, pretty much any topic you think of, there's been at least 1,500 books written
[Guest]: and articles written on that topic because India is just so richly studied by different
[Guest]: disciplines. But curiously, taxation has been written about only by economists and public
[Guest]: economists more than in the Indian case. The rest of the world has lots of literature.
[Guest]: In fact, the international literature on taxation is very dominated by work from Euro-America,
[Guest]: which of course is a totally different history of taxation. In India, the word lagaan is
[Guest]: one that is an emotive word and the relationship of taxation and colonialism is a very strong
[Guest]: one. And this idea of taxation without representation, which is what the colonial state was, has
[Guest]: made taxation a very hostile concept historically. Our historical consciousness is very hostile
[Guest]: to taxation for this reason. But part of the building of a new nation is entirely reliant
[Guest]: on a public buy-in to the social compact of taxation, which we need to understand much
[Guest]: better in India. The fact that in India, the majority of taxes come from indirect taxes
[Guest]: is a regressive move. Why is a rickshaw puller and I paying the same tax on a packet of biscuits?
[Guest]: And these kinds of creeping taxes is what makes up the majority of the tax revenue of
[Guest]: the government is entirely wrong. So you need a certain level of fiscal capacity, state
[Guest]: capacity for the state to be in a fair fashion tax people, number one. So the mechanics by
[Guest]: which you collect taxes has to be fair. And of course, there's got to be accountability.
[Guest]: You know, taxation without accountability is ludicrous. That's not democracy. I mean,
[Guest]: democracy without accountability is. And part of what is happening in India on a daily basis
[Guest]: now is precisely this hollowing out of its democratic project, where we have a paper-thin
[Guest]: veneer of, you know, so it resembles a democracy when you look at it from the outside. Oh,
[Guest]: they have elections. Oh, look, their press is free and so on. But it's been hollowed
[Guest]: out of meaning in multiple ways. But taxation is part of it. So you're not ever allowed
[Guest]: to ask any questions. You can't, you don't know who to ask the question. I mean, that
[Guest]: we also are, you know, we all, I think, remember having civics lessons. We had civics textbooks
[Guest]: and it was, we thought it was almost like a free period because it was so light touch.
[Guest]: But most of us don't have any idea how local government works. So we don't know what the
[Guest]: relationship between those of us who are privileged enough to be paying income tax, what the relationship
[Guest]: between our income tax, somebody like you, you said you pay all your taxes and you live
[Guest]: in Bombay and you see the state of the roads after the monsoons, and you don't know how
[Guest]: to connect, who to ask the questions of, hang on, I've paid my taxes. Why have these potholes
[Guest]: not been fixed? And who is in charge of which bit of the public good, you know, roads, quality
[Guest]: of air, rubbish collection, bread and butter, governance issues. We just don't know. That's
[Guest]: one. The second thing is that it is a very federally heavy system. So we are politically
[Guest]: federated and fiscally centralized. So even GST, which was meant to be an innovation,
[Guest]: has been brought in such that the GST council, you know, it has, it is first all collected
[Guest]: in the center, then in a power move, you dispense those to the states. So this is politics of
[Guest]: taxation. You're never going, we have panchayati raj institutions, which was a brilliant innovation
[Guest]: of the 73rd and 74th amendments to the constitution. But we have created local bodies that we elect,
[Guest]: terrific, but these local bodies can't collect taxes. So they are always dispensing and carrying
[Guest]: out schemes that somebody else has cooked up rather than responding to local demands.
[Guest]: So I see my forthcoming work on taxation as an extension of my work, obviously, on democracy
[Guest]: so far. If voting was one way of participating in the democratic process, paying taxes, because
[Guest]: we all pay taxes, we all don't pay income tax, but all of us in any society pay tax
[Amit Varma]: to indirect taxes is the other. Yeah, I mean, totally agree with you about the hollowing
[Amit Varma]: out of democracy. And I can't wait to therefore read your next book and chat about it with
[Amit Varma]: you for a few hours as well. Couple of quick responses that one, of course, I mean, the
[Amit Varma]: reason I have no control over the pothole on the road outside my very house is that
[Amit Varma]: in local governance, the way it is, there is no connection between power and accountability.
[Amit Varma]: I did a great episode with Shruti Rajgopal on urban governance, I'll link it from the
[Amit Varma]: show notes. But there's no connection between power and accountability. And also, we are
[Amit Varma]: nowhere we are federated really in theory, otherwise, it's extremely top down. And we
[Amit Varma]: are not, you know, we don't have the kind of local government we should. The other aspect
[Amit Varma]: of it is that the problem with India and people have kind of, it's like become normalized
[Amit Varma]: and has become normalized 70 years ago, frankly, it's been this way, right since then, is that
[Amit Varma]: instead of having a state which does a few things which the state should do and does
[Amit Varma]: them really well, we have a state which, you know, does a whole bunch of things and does
[Amit Varma]: them really badly and doesn't do those few things which we really should, like, for all
[Amit Varma]: practical purposes, we don't have rule of law in this country, for most people, unless
[Amit Varma]: you're incredibly privileged, but that's just the ground reality, we don't have it. And
[Amit Varma]: that's, like the most fundamental thing that a state should do. And this is, I think, something
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, then you begin to wonder, you spoke about accountability, we're paying
[Amit Varma]: taxes, all of that. I mean, the point is, I calculated the other day that I spend more
[Amit Varma]: than 50% of my income, I give it to the government, right? I have the 18% GST, which I can't offset
[Amit Varma]: against anything. And I have my 30 plus percent income tax, plus all the indirect taxes. So
[Amit Varma]: I am basically a slave of this government between, you know, January and June, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and everybody in this country is suffering part time slavery from the state. And it's
[Amit Varma]: okay, if you're in Scandinavia, and you're getting those kind of services back. It's
[Amit Varma]: okay, if you see a state which is actually doing something like providing the rule of
[Amit Varma]: law or taking people out of poverty, you know, we are still such a desperately poor country,
[Amit Varma]: it's unconscionable, 3000 children die of starvation every day, you know, if a natural
[Amit Varma]: disaster was to cause those kind of numbers, we would all be like, up in arms, but we've
[Amit Varma]: just normalized it. And it's a shame. And anyway, these are, sorry.
[Guest]: No, I think these are the questions of today, Amit. And I think we really, I don't see why
[Guest]: we don't ask them more. Because you say there is no rule of law unless you're incredibly
[Guest]: privileged. But as we know, as the last 12 months has shown up, if you are the most privileged
[Guest]: and the most wealthy Muslim in this country, you're completely vulnerable in today. And
[Guest]: that is what that was precisely the point that was what was being performed through
[Guest]: that entire episode of jailing a child, of a superstar, that was what was being proved.
[Guest]: And if there's you, and there are millions like you who are, who are exactly in this
[Guest]: position of paying taxes and getting nothing in return, why don't we have more questions
[Guest]: being asked? I mean, this is, there is such complacency and fear. I think the complacency
[Guest]: comes from just having enough money to not notice even if a significant part of your
[Guest]: income goes in taxes for which you get nothing in return, you can still buy rubbish disposal,
[Guest]: you can still buy water, you can still buy security. And so you think, well, you know,
[Guest]: yes, it's rubbish, and therefore you send your children abroad. And, you know, sitting
[Guest]: in the UK, I see the numbers of students going abroad to study is just multiplying. Every
[Guest]: year, year on year, we are seeing this rise. So people, you know, this has been the classic
[Guest]: definition of being middle class is how your middle class, if you don't, if you use very
[Guest]: few services provided by the state in health and education, this is a truism, we all know that.
[Guest]: But the fact that we should be holding this government, any government, accountable,
[Guest]: requires, on the one hand, a basic civic awareness, and some basic courage to say,
[Guest]: look, hang on a second, this is what being a citizen is about. I don't want to be a fan
[Guest]: or an admirer of a politician. I'm a citizen, you know, and the job of a citizen is to ask
[Guest]: difficult questions politely. There is no need for violence or, you know, but you can be civil
[Guest]: about it and ask those questions. This is Gandhi's legacy, right? This is what civil disobedience is
[Guest]: about. So I am surprised at how quiet people are in not asking these questions more. I'll admit that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah. And there's a tweet I remember from a tweeter called Sir Kazim Jeevi. I think he does
[Amit Varma]: satirical tweets. I have no idea who the person really is. But he posted a tweet recently, which
[Amit Varma]: seemed to me to be a great metaphor for this, where he said that, you know, if a Hindu goes
[Amit Varma]: to a job and he doesn't get the salary he wants, it's okay, you can tell him that, listen, I'll
[Amit Varma]: give you zero, but I'll pay the Muslim even less, right? And he'll be happy to work for you. And
[Amit Varma]: this is really a metaphor for what's happening to our nation, where I think that there is enough
[Amit Varma]: widespread bigotry that, you know, people are just happy that that's being given expression to
[Amit Varma]: and they don't really think about this stuff. And it's all been normalized anyway. And yeah,
[Guest]: and we could just rant forever about this. But it's not, it's, I don't think we are
[Guest]: ranting. And I think these are, you know, there are various ways in which we can think about it.
[Guest]: And I know that there are many who choose to say that, well, you know, the seeds of this
[Guest]: were sown a long time ago. And, you know, India is, in a sense, fulfilling a prophecy that would.
[Guest]: And I distance myself somewhat from that kind of position, because it is
[Guest]: simply, and we have enough historical evidence, both in India and elsewhere, to show that the
[Guest]: politics of hatred is actually the easiest politics to construct, right? It's that politics
[Guest]: of competition and hatred and bigotry. It's the easiest game in town. It is much harder
[Guest]: to build a politics of feeling solidarity with people you're not related to, to be aware that
[Guest]: you are part of a system that is much larger than you, that, you know, that one of the jobs
[Guest]: as a citizen is to imagine the public good and put something into it. That, it's not impossible.
[Guest]: I mean, India has the potential to do it. It's had that, and to increase those numbers takes work,
[Guest]: but absolutely it's there. You see that, you know, and it's that, but that kind of politics
[Guest]: also takes work, and it takes a lot more work. You can't buy people's attachment to love.
[Guest]: Hatred is much easier to peddle. Even to create love and solidarity, you need certain
[Guest]: techniques of how to be political, and people need to feel not squeamish about
[Guest]: gathering under a flag or loving their country, as indeed many have done, I think, on the more
[Guest]: progressive side of things. There's been a sort of embarrassment about getting dewey-eyed about
[Guest]: your country, but we need more of that. We need to get dewey-eyed about the things that are worth
[Guest]: getting dewey-eyed about, and there's plenty of that in India, and that kind of politics takes
[Guest]: work, and we need to do that work. Yeah, I mean, my lament is, I don't see that kind of
[Amit Varma]: politics anywhere. It's people like you and me kind of getting dewey-eyed, but I'll ask you,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I'll carry on from that and ask you a question from there, and we'll come back to Delhi
[Amit Varma]: later, you know, ab Delhi door nahi, or ab Delhi is a little more door, rather. So, which is this,
[Amit Varma]: like my, like one of the, you know, I spoke earlier about the many layers that have fallen
[Amit Varma]: away from my eyes about India, and one of those layers is that I always assumed that we are
[Amit Varma]: fundamentally a tolerant people, right? We are a melting pot. We are a khichdi. We've taken
[Amit Varma]: influences from everywhere, blah, blah, blah. I remember at one point, I had the politician JP
[Amit Varma]: Narayan on my show, and I pointed out that, hey, India is deeply illiberal because, you know,
[Amit Varma]: women, caste, all of that, and he said, if you look at it another way, and he wasn't disputing
[Amit Varma]: what I said, but he said the opposite is also true because our liberalism is in this sort of
[Amit Varma]: lift tolerance where our food is a mix of everything, our clothes are a mix of everything,
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth. But I've realized that no, that's not it. I think what really happened in
[Amit Varma]: 47 was this interesting experiment where a relatively liberal constitution, there's a
[Amit Varma]: lot wrong with the constitution, it doesn't protect free speech at all in my view, but whatever,
[Amit Varma]: a relatively liberal constitution was imposed on an illiberal society, and a top-down
[Amit Varma]: experiment like that was always bound to fail. Gandhi, in that sense, was right that the change
[Amit Varma]: has to come from within. We stopped trying. We got the constitution, we said, okay, we've done
[Amit Varma]: our bit, good constitution, blah, blah, blah. We stopped trying. And today, so, you know,
[Amit Varma]: politics has caught up with society. We were always like this. It is not that this bigotry
[Amit Varma]: is something new that has been created by politics. You know, politics is downstream of culture,
[Amit Varma]: as Andrew Breitbart once said. So, we were always like this. And it is we, English-speaking elites
[Amit Varma]: in our little bubbles, who, you know, thought that, hey, we are a tolerant nation, who's,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and all of that. Our idea of India was always delusion. That's sort of my negative and
[Amit Varma]: pessimistic view of where we are today. Now, you've actually, you know, spent time out there
[Amit Varma]: in these two villages and otherwise, and, you know, lived among people and spoken to people and all of
[Amit Varma]: that. So, first of all, what is sort of your sense of that? You know, do you feel I am overstating it?
[Amit Varma]: Or do you feel that there is something to this? Because, you know, I did an episode with Akshay
[Amit Varma]: Mukul on the Gita Press. And, you know, with that, and of course, you must have read the book,
[Amit Varma]: and you realize that, you know, this is not new. We were talking about love jihad and cow slaughter
[Amit Varma]: 100 years ago. This is not new. And, you know, that, you know, gives me great cause for despair.
[Guest]: But what are your thoughts? Okay, so I refuse to despair, because then I don't think I'll be able
[Guest]: to get out of bed, because it is that serious, in many sense. So, the only way not to despair
[Guest]: is to constantly think of counterexamples. So, let me give you, to my mind, the most important
[Guest]: counterexample of we are always like this, and, you know, nothing's going to change.
[Guest]: My biggest counterexample to that is the polling booth in India.
[Guest]: The polling booth in India is unlike any other public space in India. Think about it.
[Guest]: Where it is a public building, everybody has to come there to vote. There is no other way to vote.
[Guest]: There are orderly lines, and you may land up, Amit Verma, to vote, and you see your driver
[Guest]: standing ahead of you in the queue, and you want to go and meet your friend for coffee,
[Guest]: because it's a holiday, but you cannot go up to your driver and say,
[Guest]: can you go to the back? And I'll say, that is the one place you can't do it.
[Guest]: I don't have a driver, but I buy your point.
[Guest]: Yeah. So, the fact that you can't do that, it is the only space and the only moment
[Guest]: where both you and your staff know that you won't ask and they won't agree. Now,
[Guest]: and there is discipline. We say we don't have discipline. People go on time, they do it,
[Guest]: it happens, it works like clockwork, it works. This is not to say that, so what is this proof?
[Guest]: It proves that if you, in a committed institutional setting, you know, institutional input,
[Guest]: so you know, as economists would call it, can create new kinds of behavior. This, to my mind,
[Guest]: is the only instance in India of genuine what we would call civility, or what Ambedkar would call
[Guest]: fraternity, where basically what is the meaning of that? It means that you are willing to
[Guest]: accommodate people you are not related to and don't know from before, but you conduct yourself
[Guest]: in a manner that makes you part of the common project. That's what creating fraternity is about.
[Guest]: Now, we are able to do that in the polling booths. You don't get it in the cinema queue,
[Guest]: because not everybody can afford a cinema ticket. You don't get it in the railway queues,
[Guest]: because not everybody goes on the trains and, you know, the middle class again exit that and fly as
[Guest]: much as they can. So the polling station is actually the only place in India where you get
[Guest]: genuine social mixing, genuine orderliness, genuine discipline. And as, you know, I've had
[Guest]: Dalit friends tell me, both in my research village, but in different parts of India,
[Guest]: you know, I remember talking to this young girl, she had just voted for the first time, she was 19.
[Guest]: And she said, aaj meri bhi koi value hai, when she comes out of the polling station. She said,
[Guest]: you know, that sense of being valued, and she used the English word value, aaj mera bhi koi value hai.
[Guest]: Now, and she's showing me her ink mark on her finger. So the shared dignity that being
[Guest]: recognised as a citizen who is exactly equal to the next one standing in the queue, regardless of
[Guest]: who you are, the dirt under your fingernails or your torn sari doesn't discriminate, people can't
[Guest]: look you up and down and say peeche jaao, that means that this is an institutional intervention.
[Guest]: So we should not, therefore, be surprised that the lower down on the social hierarchy you are,
[Guest]: the more keen you are to vote. That is one of the explanations I offer in Why India Votes,
[Guest]: on the basis of this team of 12 people who worked in different parts of India, is that people like
[Guest]: to vote. It's the one time they get dignity, man. You know, so they turn around and say,
[Guest]: why wouldn't you vote? Humein to achcha lagta hai vote dalne. So, you know, this is a pleasurable
[Guest]: activity. So, which is to make the point that institutional interventions are important,
[Guest]: and institutions and public institutions are incredibly important. The Election Commission
[Guest]: of India is, for no surprise, the most respected public institution and survey after survey after
[Guest]: survey done by Lok Niti for many decades. Part of our hollowing out is that we are hollowing out
[Guest]: the Election Commission of India now. We used to pull off this amazing. So, you ask whether there
[Guest]: is despair or whether there is hope. I mean, there is hope because you know, we know, and this is,
[Guest]: therefore, not to compare India to any international body. No barometers, no indicators that, you know,
[Guest]: I know this government and other Indian people are touchy about why should be who is X and Y
[Guest]: country to tell us how democratic we are. And I think, yeah, sure, let's just compare
[Guest]: India to its own record. You know, how you were doing 10 years ago, 15 years ago,
[Guest]: and let's see what's got better and what's got worse. Let's compare India to its own record.
[Guest]: And there, I think what has been happening with elections is genuinely worrying,
[Guest]: because we had a good thing. We were being able to do something there that was genuinely
[Guest]: transformative. So, that would be the counter to your question. But I had another thought,
[Amit Varma]: it'll come back. Yeah. Yeah, no, there are many real moments in why India votes, which also I
[Amit Varma]: want to discuss in some detail when we get to it. Though my brief counter thinking aloud to this
[Amit Varma]: would be that fine, they're voting. I understand it's an egalitarian process. Everyone feels like
[Amit Varma]: they have a voice, but they're voting for the party which is going to shut the butcher shop
[Amit Varma]: and lynch the butcher, you know, so who are the real butchers? And that majoritarian trend within
[Amit Varma]: society the way we think worries me. I'll sort of, you know, ask a question, which is, in a sense,
[Amit Varma]: another aspect of this same question. And for that, I'll, you know, I'll quote from your book,
[Amit Varma]: which you put together, which you edited called Muslim portraits. And there towards the start,
[Amit Varma]: you wrote, writing about the Muslim man in India, the historian Shahid Amin has pointed out
[Amit Varma]: that with stereotypes, we leave biography and history behind, recognizing those different from
[Amit Varma]: us largely through visible signs, as if such human beings belong to a different species altogether.
[Amit Varma]: His quote ends here, you continue, this volume strives towards breaking down,
[Amit Varma]: challenging and humanizing this category by presenting a set of portraits and most of
[Amit Varma]: Muslims in contemporary India, in a climate of widespread stereotypes and prejudice.
[Amit Varma]: This book attempts to offer a chance to read about ordinary and real lives,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote, which is a fantastic project. And what therefore you are doing here is that you
[Amit Varma]: are fighting the abstract notion or that all Muslims are like this and so on, with concrete
[Amit Varma]: instances of lives lived. So you can see the difference and can see the difference it makes.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something I've discussed with many guests. And I think first with Anshul Malhotra,
[Amit Varma]: where she was talking about when she was in Pakistan, and she was talking about someone
[Amit Varma]: who related that at the time of partition, before partition happened, you know, there was this
[Amit Varma]: village and they would all sit together, Muslims and Hindus in the village was in Pakistan, and
[Amit Varma]: they'd listen to the radio. And everybody in the village was all sort of together, they knew each
[Amit Varma]: other. I mean, it's the same community, right? Hindu, Muslim, whatever, it's the same community.
[Amit Varma]: But then as news begins to come of the violence and all of that, they begin to sort of split
[Amit Varma]: apart and it kind of gets worse and the abstract takes over the concrete. Similarly, she talks
[Amit Varma]: about how she's talking to one family in Muslim family in Pakistan who fled during partition,
[Amit Varma]: and they're saying, Oh, Hindus did this, Hindus did that, Hindus are like this. And then they
[Amit Varma]: realize she's there and she said, tum nahi bete, tum nahi. So you know, abstract bad, concrete
[Amit Varma]: good. And this seems to me to be like a sort of an important project of putting like one way of
[Amit Varma]: kind of fighting this is putting the concrete more and more out there. So that because these abstract
[Amit Varma]: notions like nationalism and purity and all of this rubbish is, you know, what is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: getting us into this. And you've, you know, in a sense, what an anthropologist or an ethnographer
[Amit Varma]: is doing as opposed to say, a political scientist with grand theories, or even a sociologist,
[Amit Varma]: is you're just leaving all that abstract stuff aside, and you're going straight to the concrete,
[Amit Varma]: and you're actually talking to people and seeing how things are and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So in your time in these two villages, and so on and so forth, you know, what are your
[Amit Varma]: observations? And in general, you know, what would you say about sort of this framework?
[Guest]: So, the ethnographic method, you're absolutely right, is very grounded in interaction. But we
[Guest]: also are able to create categories and analysis inductively on the basis of that data, right?
[Guest]: So we close the circle, it's not just about picking up raw information, it's about, you know,
[Guest]: we're thinking to ask certain kinds of questions as ethnographers. And we turn it into anthropology
[Guest]: by engaging with the philosophical analytical literature, that we are contributing concepts
[Guest]: to on the basis of people's lives, lived lives. So theory is not, you know, and thinking about
[Guest]: rural India, this is very important, because rural India has always been seen to be the recipient of
[Guest]: progressive ideas. And on this, I, you know, I have a, I think Ambedkar and Nehru were on the
[Guest]: same side on this, and they've done a real disservice, because this idea of this village
[Guest]: being a sink of localism and vice is, you know, is the image that is, and out of ignorance,
[Guest]: that they have to be taught stuff. And this is across the political spectrum. So the left thinks
[Guest]: the vanguard has to go out and, you know, the middle class intelligentsia have to go out and
[Guest]: educate the peasants. And even, you know, the paternalism of progressive ideas is that you've
[Guest]: got to educate these people. And part of what I'm trying to do here is also turn the tables
[Guest]: completely and say, look at the village, it actually teaches us through, say, the practice
[Guest]: of cultivation that we spoke about right at the start, that there's something to learn here about
[Guest]: the nature of democracy. So let's put that to a side for a minute. We can return to it. I just
[Guest]: want to come back to this volume, Muslim Portraits. You know, this volume was a response to the 2002
[Guest]: pogrom in Gujarat. And I think a lot of people were horrified and traumatized by what had happened.
[Guest]: And we were all thinking of how to understand it, how to comprehend it more than anything else,
[Guest]: if you're academics. And it struck me that some of the best anthropologists of India
[Guest]: had been working in Muslim societies, and they had all done very academic, brilliant piece of writing.
[Guest]: It's a who's who, right, the list of contributors. But what I appealed to them was to do what you
[Guest]: read out, is to just write about any one person. Let's make it real. Because even what I found was
[Guest]: even my most progressive friends would talk about the Muslims, or the Muslim. You knew in many cases
[Guest]: they hadn't actually ever known a Muslim, or, you know, been a part of their lives or known what it
[Guest]: was like, or, you know, and not to fetishize it in any way, but beyond a point, you had to humanize
[Guest]: this story. And journalists are very good at doing this, you know, they're writing about a cyclone
[Guest]: somewhere, but they'll pick on this five-year-old girl who was separated from her parents, and you
[Guest]: are invested, because you read about that one individual. And that's kind of what we were doing.
[Guest]: And each of these portraits, you know, anyone who reads the book can see what a – I mean,
[Guest]: it makes several points, extraordinary lives, but every life is extraordinary, to my mind.
[Guest]: I think every life is extraordinary, once you learn about it. But also the natural diversity,
[Guest]: that, you know, how different Muslims across India are to each other, and how much like – so where
[Guest]: I work in my research village, the only difference between the Muslim women and the Hindu women is
[Guest]: that the Muslim women don't wear bindis, but literally there is – and they wear glass bangles.
[Guest]: But there is nothing else, the food they eat, the way they keep their homes, you know, the
[Guest]: Hindu homes will have a tulsi tree in it, that's all. And the Muslim will have a rolled-up prayer
[Guest]: rug in the corner. But other than that, it's indistinguishable, their language, their – you
[Guest]: know. And one needed to put a sort of whole cast of characters like this out in a book,
[Guest]: for people to see for themselves. Now, I hope – you know, and I must give a shout-out to
[Guest]: Yoda Press, who published this book bravely at the time, a small independent press,
[Guest]: and they took it on, and then Indiana University Press did the global edition for it.
[Guest]: But there was a chance of hoping that people who read the book will be persuaded by it. Now,
[Guest]: part of the hollowing out of democracy that is happening, that we are concerned about,
[Guest]: is that in the current climate, I think it is difficult to contribute anything to a public
[Guest]: conversation that has been saturated mainly through untold sums of money that comes in
[Guest]: through newly introduced electoral bonds, to the point where you cannot escape the drip, drip,
[Guest]: drip of five WhatsApp forwards every day. And you've got to be incredibly resilient
[Guest]: to not be swayed by even one of those five, you know. You've got to be really, really grounded.
[Guest]: And therefore, when I talk about the hollowing out, I think electoral bonds and what it has done
[Guest]: is this, that, you know, the UP elections were a very good case where a government with a record
[Guest]: that did so badly in the pandemic, one million deaths, where migrant workers were treated the
[Guest]: way they were, stray cattle has caused – you know, there are blindingly obvious reasons why
[Guest]: an incumbent government would be punished. And Indian voters have been very good at punishing
[Guest]: incumbent governments for, you know, not performing. And people always would say in India,
[Guest]: you know, roti banate hain to palatna padta hai. You've got to cook both sides of a chapati,
[Guest]: otherwise one burns, you know, so you've got to keep changing the governments. This is how people
[Guest]: talk about it. In that kind of scenario, when people don't do that, you realise that something
[Guest]: else is going on. There is a communication strategy that is enabled by untold, non-transparent sums
[Guest]: of vast sums of money. And the challenge for any of us who write, who want to intervene,
[Guest]: who want to contribute to public conversation is, how do you do that now? Publishing books
[Guest]: is not going to be – you know, nobody's going to – even if they read it, they'd say, haan, this was
[Guest]: like in Hua karta tha, now India is a different place. They will completely put that to a side.
[Guest]: So, how do you fight back? And I think, you know, Yogendra Yadav talks about a truth army to deal
[Guest]: with the troll army, and I think that's – you kind of think, have to think in that kind of
[Guest]: scale with battle lines drawn now. Yeah, and you mentioned COVID and the elections is also demon.
[Amit Varma]: Like after demonetisation happened, I thought, oh my God, they're going to get hit so hard in UP.
[Amit Varma]: How can they possibly win after an assault like this on people's rights? And just look what
[Amit Varma]: happened. It's like, kind of blew my mind. And you know, what you said about untold sums of money
[Amit Varma]: funding this. Of course, that's true. But I'll both counter that and counter my counter.
[Amit Varma]: The counter to that is, look, I think society is like that. Society is the way it is. It is what
[Amit Varma]: it is. Like, I think the reason Yogendra's truth army would not work is that people don't want that
[Amit Varma]: truth. People want the hate because it amplifies what they feel inside them. And that is my sort
[Amit Varma]: of negative view of that. But to counter what I just said, it is also true that all this money
[Amit Varma]: all this money and this machinery makes a difference. Because imagine you're a 15 year old in
[Amit Varma]: 2015. And through your friends or through whatever you come across this WhatsApp video,
[Amit Varma]: which is full of hate or full of lies or full of oh, Muslims are multiplying so fast or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: full of this shit. Once you watch that, your social media algorithm will keep showing you
[Amit Varma]: similar stuff. And you will never be exposed to anything else. You know, people like you and me,
[Amit Varma]: we often commit the curse of knowledge, where we think that we have a certain bedrock of
[Amit Varma]: understanding what India is and all of that. But most young people today have no way of accessing
[Amit Varma]: that. It's just us, right? And what I'm talking about these social media rabbit holes, I actually
[Amit Varma]: experienced it myself because a couple of years back, I did this experiment where I wanted to
[Amit Varma]: figure out what the Hindu right wing is kind of talking about. So I didn't want my YouTube
[Amit Varma]: algorithm to get messed up. So I opened incognito window and different Gmail account and I go into
[Amit Varma]: that. And my two YouTubes are completely different. The normal YouTube that I listen to is whatever
[Amit Varma]: the normal shit I like. But the other one is just filled with hate. You know, people talk about
[Amit Varma]: Yati Narsinan and now I started watching his videos and saving them a year and a half back
[Amit Varma]: because I couldn't believe what I was seeing. Those guys refer to Modi as Mulana Modi, because
[Amit Varma]: to them he hasn't done enough for Hindus. You know, those guys criticize Adityanath because
[Amit Varma]: he's saying he's been like CM for so long, what has he done for us? Right? So it's I mean, one,
[Amit Varma]: I think these guys have unleashed a tiger, which even they can't ride. And, you know, and so it's
[Amit Varma]: both of these happening, society is messed up, it's being amplified by money. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: these tendencies of social media, which are driving engagement, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But you tend to kind of amplify this more and more. But then to that, you know, I think this
[Guest]: is where the empirical evidence is really important. And you go state by state in India,
[Guest]: and I'm not the first one, by any means to point this out that there are certain states in India,
[Guest]: where this kind of narrative gets you nowhere. Right? So it's not, you know, so this despair
[Guest]: is also lazy, because one is worried, but you especially because one is worried, you need to
[Guest]: look at what are the places where clearly it works in UP that we saw, it didn't work in Bengal,
[Guest]: but it worked to a certain extent, they did much better, right, the BJP improved its performance,
[Guest]: but they did throw everything in the kitchen sink at it, and they still didn't. So we know that
[Guest]: there are some things that work and some things don't. And there are certain parts of India where
[Guest]: this kind of hate mongering works better than in others. And it is interesting that where human
[Guest]: development indicators are better, like in Tamil Nadu, Kerala, etc, they don't get a look at.
[Guest]: So the clue, I think, is therefore to find why it doesn't work in certain parts.
[Guest]: And that is where one finds the resources to push back. I, you know, this idea that
[Guest]: you can't do anything is, I mean, I know it may be pie-in-the-sky stuff, but
[Guest]: I don't know, I just think, can you live with yourself if you don't even try to push back?
[Guest]: Try to be brave, try to call out, say the emperor has no clothes.
[Amit Varma]: So I was chatting with a friend of mine about this, where, you know, he brought up the Akar
[Amit Varma]: Patel episode. I did an episode with Akar and Akar through it was full of optimism and I was
[Amit Varma]: full of pessimism. Now I love Akar. I love his optimism. He's always going out there and fighting
[Amit Varma]: and all that. And at the time we recorded his passport was with the government, but they gave
[Amit Varma]: it back, but they didn't let him leave. So it's quite funny. But where my pessimism comes from
[Amit Varma]: is my pessimism doesn't mean that I shut up and I just, you know, disengage. I think I will still
[Amit Varma]: wake up every morning and do what I feel is the right thing to do because it's the right thing to
[Amit Varma]: do because it's the right thing to do. Forget outcomes. So we do that. But at the same time,
[Amit Varma]: like I'm convinced that things are going to burn and but somebody has to be there after that to
[Amit Varma]: build it back up. And I volunteer for the job right from now, but it's going to burn. That's
[Amit Varma]: my pessimism. And I agree with you that that pessimism should be tempered with acknowledging
[Amit Varma]: that in large parts of India, especially our more sensible friends in the south, it's not
[Amit Varma]: quite like that. I was really thinking of the Hindi heartland where I talk about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: where my pessimism comes from. And speaking of Hindi and speaking of heartland,
[Amit Varma]: I think we should now go to your Delhi experiences. So go ahead.
[Guest]: Yeah, I think, you know, Delhi is unlike, say, Bombay and Calcutta. Delhi is, you know, people
[Guest]: don't... Bombay and Kolkata are cities that filmmakers have made films to and people have
[Guest]: written novels about and, you know, they feature in the imagination in a way that I think Delhi
[Guest]: gets short shrift on it. And it's quite fashionable to bash Delhi. But I mean, just, you know, part of
[Guest]: doing this exercise with you makes me think that 1980s Delhi was such an extraordinary place.
[Guest]: Yes. It was an extraordinary coming together of world class academic work.
[Guest]: And when I say world class, I know this is a bone of contention, but it's a very simple litmus test.
[Guest]: You know, would people in other countries put your writings on their reading list or not?
[Guest]: You know, are you a historian by not what your peers here tell you, but whether somebody who
[Guest]: has no stake in who you are, whatever, thinks your work follows the protocols and has the
[Guest]: credibility to call you a historian and give their students your published work to read.
[Guest]: And that's the kind of credentials I mean. What language you've spoken is...
[Guest]: By the way, just to go by, in case I forget to say this, you said, oh, you know, it was all a
[Guest]: dream of the English speaking elite. I'm not sure the English speaking elite is quite as
[Guest]: progressive as we think it was. So that's a side. So Delhi had, you know, so it was the social
[Guest]: science. It still is, in many ways, the social science capital of the country. But at a ground
[Guest]: level, there was, you think about, say, even a square kilometre around the Mandi House area,
[Guest]: the National School of Drama producing the greats for generation after generation after generation,
[Guest]: Sahitya Academy, Cheek by Jowl with terrific auditoriums where the greatest artists were
[Guest]: performing. And then you have all the houses of culture of all the embassies. You have the
[Guest]: House of Soviet Science and Culture, where my younger sister learned ballet for nine years.
[Guest]: Cheek by Jowl, where Hindustani classical music is being taught at Gandhar Mahavidyalaya,
[Guest]: where theatre, Triveni Kala Sangam is set up and Singhajit Singh is, you know, this great Manipuri
[Guest]: artist. And then you have, you know, what scholars have called the ethnic revolution,
[Guest]: a complete discovery of India's handloom and textile, where the look to have was to wear
[Guest]: silver jewellery and India's exquisite textiles. And, you know, the festivals of India happening
[Guest]: abroad. So suddenly you have incredible pride in your crafts traditions, your arts traditions,
[Guest]: your music, your theatre, your writing. And you know it is of such value that people across the
[Guest]: world flock to come and see this. And my own experience of this really was partly just going
[Guest]: to, you know, all these, they all had film festivals. The documentaries section was always
[Guest]: free. You had to buy tickets. So as students, you had no money to buy tickets to watch the features.
[Guest]: So we started by just watching the documentaries because it was always free.
[Guest]: And so one's appreciation of why documentaries are so important came from that, and it was just
[Guest]: there. But also, you know, our college had a film club, the Delhi University had a film club. When
[Guest]: I went to do my master's, we knew how to run projectors and watch Herzog and Truffaut and,
[Guest]: you know, the greats of world cinema alongside our own greats of Ghatak and Ray and Benegal
[Guest]: and everybody else. And all of this came together, you know, in what, to my mind, now looking back,
[Guest]: I think what the student movement, Spik Mckay, achieved, the Society for the Promotion of Indian
[Guest]: Culture and Music Amongst Youth, was really to take this huge amount of creative capital
[Guest]: that India had and take it into schools and colleges. You know, and so many of us got
[Guest]: swept up in that. And I spent the best part of my university years totally involved in Spik Mckay,
[Guest]: working with everybody from Ravi Shankar and Bismillah Khan to, you know, Rashid Khan was a
[Guest]: new young artist to their Bahawalkar. They were, you know, 1920, just coming into their own,
[Guest]: performing as first artists. You could, I think, you know, Bismillah Khan telling a bunch of young
[Guest]: students what it is to be a Muslim, who did his riyaz in Kashi Vishwanath Temple,
[Guest]: had more impact than any chapters on secularism you could teach them,
[Guest]: right? Because Bismillah Khan said it with a twinkle in his eye, with his
[Guest]: affection, and with alongside producing divine music.
[Guest]: And this was repeated over and over again. Every artist did it in their own way. They were living
[Guest]: embodiments of some of these values. So, when we think about what kind of, you know, this is
[Guest]: political. This is, and the politics of solidarity has to harness this aspect of India, which
[Guest]: I personally feel, it was, of course, a huge privilege, you know, to live in the nation's
[Guest]: capital at that time. But Spik Mckay, for instance, took, you know, when we, I was All-India
[Guest]: Secretary for Spik Mckay for two or three years, and when I took over, we had about 50 chapters.
[Guest]: Within two years, we had 200 chapters, you know, they were all over India. Now there are even,
[Guest]: you know, way more all these years later. Kiran said, you know, you know, you can't
[Guest]: say, you know, a hundred years later, Kiran Seth, who started it, you know, has remained so focused.
[Guest]: It's incredible. It's his life's work. But you could see the buy-in of students and academics
[Guest]: based in universities and colleges across the country, that they completely, and artists
[Guest]: themselves, who we had no money to pay, you know, did it because they understood the value of
[Guest]: creating a new generation of listeners to share what they had rather than be complacent.
[Guest]: And that, you know, when we think about what we need to do more of, we need to do more,
[Guest]: we take it so for granted. You know, I think the opposite of cultivating democracy is not
[Guest]: to not cultivate. It is complacency. We just think it's going to just happen. It's going to
[Guest]: just continue into the future without any effort on our parts. But it takes effort. And we are
[Guest]: fortunate enough to live in a country which has this embarrassment of riches. You know, you have,
[Guest]: if you see a Kudiyattam performance from Kerala, you will never forget it. Because I remember once
[Guest]: in Delhi, we were, group had come from, and they were going to perform in the School of Planning
[Guest]: and Architecture. And there was a courtyard in SBA. And so we went, you know, organisers,
[Guest]: finished classes and went running to help and see what had setting up. And then, you know,
[Guest]: it was about three o'clock in the afternoon, and they'd been at it from 11 o'clock in the morning,
[Guest]: making this huge kolam, right, with rice powder. Intricate design of the goddess and all kinds of
[Guest]: things happening and, you know, and remarkable skill. And it was really complex and covered this
[Guest]: whole courtyard. So for a long time, one just sat there watching them make this kolam and making
[Guest]: sure they had cups of tea or whatever they wanted. Then they went off and all got dressed and the
[Guest]: performance started as it got dark and the lights. And then this drumming and the music and the dance
[Guest]: started and the theatre, it's a theatre form. But they danced over that kolam. So by the end,
[Guest]: there was not a trace of that exquisite, intricate design left on the floor.
[Guest]: Now, the ideas of patience, of skill, of performance, of talent, and an attitude to
[Guest]: hard work that was so ephemeral that you, within hours of creating it, danced on it and vanquished
[Guest]: it. You know, these kinds of things are India's traditions. And where are we creating the
[Guest]: conversations of, what does Kuruyattam have to teach us about Hindutva and how can we help it
[Guest]: think against a majoritarian, homogenizing agenda? And there must be those answers. But we've got to
[Amit Varma]: think with them, right? Yeah, I had a lovely conversation with the biologist Gautam Menon
[Amit Varma]: on the show a year ago. And he was also talking about, you know, how Delhi was in the 80s and all
[Amit Varma]: the concerts he went to and the music he listened to. And it just made me incredibly envious that
[Amit Varma]: though I was sentient at the time, and we would visit Delhi sometimes that I was completely
[Amit Varma]: oblivious to it. But you know, so here's my next question, that, you know, you spoke of all this,
[Amit Varma]: all the culture, all the music, what Spike Mckay did, all of that with nostalgia. So why with
[Amit Varma]: nostalgia? Does it not exist? And if it doesn't, does it not exist? If so, why does it not exist
[Amit Varma]: anymore? And if so, then what can people listening to this, who find it attractive, what can they do
[Amit Varma]: to, you know, build something like this again? What would you do? I mean, it's no, it's not,
[Guest]: it's not, it's not nostalgia for an India. I mean, you know, I think it's, nostalgia is a very,
[Amit Varma]: I'm not saying India, I'm saying that cultural scene where things were happening,
[Guest]: when you were exposed to all this. I think there is a lot of that happening. I mean,
[Guest]: I'm in India several times a year, I, you know, because my research is there, I go in and out,
[Guest]: one of my sisters lives there. So I'm very, you know, I hear about what is happening. And I think
[Guest]: it is there, of course, it's, you know, it's existing, we had never seen a mall before that.
[Guest]: And so when Dastakar had its annual sale, it was the biggest event to go and stock up on your,
[Guest]: you know, on buying new clothes once a year, or things that you were going to decorate your room
[Guest]: with in university and so on. So I'm sure it's not, it's not as if it's disappeared. I think
[Guest]: we've got to think about, it's become harder now, because the post 1991 India is one with more
[Guest]: traffic, more, more malls, more machine made stuff, more, more global cuisine. So we have had to,
[Guest]: to, I think, as Indians think about what was there before any of these came in from the outside to
[Guest]: speak and find accommodations. It was like, you know, when the first burgers were being sold in
[Guest]: Wimpy's and so on, people thought, goodness, you know, chaat and samosa is going to disappear. And
[Guest]: it didn't, you know, people realise that you eat, you can eat chaat once a week, but you'll eat
[Guest]: burger once in two months. It's a different kind of sociality of eating, going to a burger joint,
[Guest]: as they're called, or eating chaat in your neighbourhood from your local chaatwala. So
[Guest]: India's, you know, there's been all kinds of accommodations. But with our traditions too,
[Guest]: I think we need to think more about how, what those accommodations will be. And maybe some of
[Guest]: the messages that were implicit, and Bismillah Khan didn't ever have to talk about the Kashi
[Guest]: Vishwanath temple, because of, of Kashi now being the Prime Minister's constituency, or because it
[Guest]: was, you know, in a state where the Chief Minister is Ajay Bisht, but, but because he just wanted to
[Guest]: share what his talim had been like. So the agenda now may be different, and maybe needs to be made
[Guest]: more obvious. But that is going to be, we can't, that has to be an engagement with our traditions,
[Guest]: engagement with our artists, to articulate some of these ideas that we have taken for granted.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I actually am not, I mean, if there's one of the things I'm hopeful about, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: one thing I'm hopeful about, of course, always is that in this future of unknown unknowns,
[Amit Varma]: you know, technology, much as it might help the state also empowers individuals in a way
[Amit Varma]: that political battles for liberalism haven't really been able to. So that's one hope. But
[Amit Varma]: the other hope is that I think young people today have more interest in arts and culture,
[Amit Varma]: and better attention spans and people give them credit for. I think there's too much of a
[Amit Varma]: stereotypical notion of what modern life is like short attention spans, everything is materialistic,
[Amit Varma]: blah, blah, blah. I don't really think that's true. I mean, I teach a writing course also,
[Amit Varma]: I interact with, I've interacted with 1000s of young people literally through that. And
[Amit Varma]: that's not at all the case. So maybe there is sort of some hope.
[Guest]: I agree with you completely there. I think this bashing of the next generation, and as I always
[Guest]: say that, you know, none of us in our generation, my generation growing up, had to worry about
[Guest]: whether the earth is the planet is going to outlive us. Whereas the young people today, this
[Guest]: is an urgent issue. They're much more cognizant about what they eat and what they buy and how
[Guest]: much they do for these reasons. And that's a completely different level of anxiety they're
[Guest]: dealing with. And look at the flourishing of poetry and music in and how ways in which people
[Guest]: are able to communicate despite the shutting down of dissent. So yeah, I am in complete agreement
[Guest]: that dismissing the next generation is incredibly unfair.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, not just the shutting down of dissent, the shutting down of TikTok, which I thought was such
[Amit Varma]: an incredible tragedy, because TikTok just empowered so many people who didn't have access
[Amit Varma]: to other platforms at the time. I mean, in combination with of course, Jio and the good Mr.
[Amit Varma]: Ambani making internet, making broadband widely available. It just, you know, the kind of art that
[Amit Varma]: was happening on TikTok, I taught a course on it briefly, I could only teach one batch on TikTok
[Amit Varma]: in Indian society, where I shared hundreds of videos on WhatsApp. So it was literally WhatsApp
[Amit Varma]: University, but it shut down the month I did my course. So like, whatever, you know, so can't do
[Amit Varma]: it anymore. But I was blown away more than anything else, because you had people who otherwise had no
[Amit Varma]: access to these common traditional entertainment platforms, actually being able to point their
[Amit Varma]: mobile phone at themselves and express themselves. And initially, it is a simple stuff, you're
[Amit Varma]: lip syncing to something and you're recreating a meme. But some of it was just so incredibly
[Amit Varma]: mind bogglingly good. And, you know, shutting that down, just because TikTok is Chinese
[Amit Varma]: seems completely ridiculous, especially since we can't do anything else about China.
[Guest]: I'd love to hear more about, you know, what you put together, I really would, because I read the
[Guest]: Indian press quite closely. And I've come across several stories, you know, we were talking about
[Guest]: women in India, it was such a important way in which women could communicate, right, and express
[Guest]: themselves, when you take everything away from them, if they have a reasonable quality of
[Amit Varma]: smartphone, they were using it. Women, people of alternate sexualities,
[Amit Varma]: like, imagine if you're a person of alternate sexuality in a small village and that small
[Amit Varma]: sample size of people, you might be the only person like you. And you think you're a freak,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and you think, you know, all of that shit. And then you realize that there are so
[Amit Varma]: many people like you, and they're all doing great work. And you can join in that community. And you
[Amit Varma]: can do great work. And you can do creative work. And it's just so incredible and so moving,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I'll figure out a way to kind of share those hundreds of videos with you and talk about
[Amit Varma]: what you know, we'll make that a project at some point in time. Let's sort of go back to your
[Amit Varma]: journey. And before you know, we get to Pakistan and before we get to the Pathan unarmed, I want
[Amit Varma]: to understand your subject a little better as well, like anthropology, sociology, in the minds
[Amit Varma]: of someone who is not into the social sciences, these are all kind of very fuzzy terms and all of
[Amit Varma]: that. But they are specific things, there are specific differences between them. You know,
[Amit Varma]: one of the interesting parts of you know, reading your book was how you talk about the academic
[Amit Varma]: debates within social anthropology and its relationship to history, you talk about the
[Amit Varma]: subaltern school, you talk about poststructuralism and all of that. So I want you to kind of
[Amit Varma]: demystify this for me and you know, all the listeners that what are these fields? What are
[Amit Varma]: the sort of frameworks through which you look at the world? And what were the specific dilemmas
[Amit Varma]: that you faced when embarking upon this project? Because I think one of the things that happens
[Amit Varma]: when we are young, not just in academics, but also in academics, is that you discover a framework and
[Amit Varma]: the framework explains the world so well, it answers everything and you think, wow, great,
[Amit Varma]: and you fall in love with the framework. And sometimes, you know, that is all you ever carry
[Amit Varma]: with you and you're close to everything else and you have one hammer for every nail. But sometimes
[Amit Varma]: you keep, you know, discovering the world and discovering different aspects of it and forging
[Amit Varma]: your own path. And you know, in your book, the Pathan unarmed, it feels like you did a little
[Amit Varma]: bit of this in the sense that you went beyond stereotypical notions firstly of what Pathan's
[Amit Varma]: were like, but also you grappled with the idea of what an anthropologist is supposed to do and
[Amit Varma]: thought deeply about the different schools and all of that. So I'd love you to tell me, you know,
[Guest]: more about that. Thank you. It's very generous of you to create this kind of space for a question
[Guest]: like that. Now, the first thing to say is that sociology and anthropology are the same thing
[Guest]: in India. In as much as what, say, what, you know, what I was trained in at the Delhi School
[Guest]: of Economics for three years was sociology, which officially would be social anthropology in the UK
[Guest]: and elsewhere, right? In India, in the West, it's become sociology is, you know, crudely put, it's
[Guest]: a study of the modern West. Anthropology is about the rest of the world. In India, that kind of
[Guest]: distinction is meaningless, right? You study sociology, you study India, you study other places.
[Guest]: This is true of the global South, generally, you know, in most parts of Latin America, Africa,
[Guest]: universities, people use the word sociology, not social anthropology. And of course, social
[Guest]: anthropology in here, in Euro-America, also carries the burden of the colonial project
[Guest]: in its initial years, and that's a complicated relationship, and we can talk about it, but
[Guest]: it's not directly relevant, but it's very much there, and people should be aware of it, and we
[Guest]: can always link a couple of things if people want to read about those debates, and especially what's
[Guest]: happening with decolonizing the curriculum now in several universities. Personally speaking,
[Guest]: I think I've always, I have never found a single frame that helps explain the world.
[Guest]: I have, like I said earlier, I've always come up with questions that have intrigued me,
[Guest]: that have wrought me of sleep. And then I'm quite
[Guest]: Catholic about using disciplinary methods from different disciplines to help understand the issue.
[Guest]: Now, this has caused me no end of trouble within academia, because universities are built on the
[Guest]: logic of disciplinary silos. Disciplinary silos are very important to academic, to university
[Guest]: academics, and I have, to put it plainly, just zero patience with it, because I think it's a
[Guest]: little bit pathetic, because you're trying to understand the world, you know, talk to, see what
[Guest]: works. Having said that, I wouldn't want to be any other kind of social scientist. I would always
[Guest]: want to be a social anthropologist for the principal reason is that it's the most satisfying
[Guest]: for two reasons. One is that it's a very holistic understanding of any society. So, unlike, say,
[Guest]: political science, economics, theology, the names indicate what aspect of society they're interested
[Guest]: in. Sociology or social anthropology is equally interested in a society's religious beliefs as
[Guest]: it is on its economy, as what its politics is about. And the reason why we can afford to be so
[Guest]: all-encompassing is because the unit of study is small. So, the method is to immerse for many
[Guest]: months, sometimes years, to try and understand all these different aspects of that society and
[Guest]: their interrelationships. But you do this inductively, like I said, which means that you
[Guest]: don't come in with a predetermined question, or you don't come in with a predetermined hypothesis
[Guest]: normally. So, I went to these two villages, for instance, to give you an example, or, you know,
[Guest]: the Pathan work that you asked me about. My question was how on earth can Muslim-Pashtun
[Guest]: men turn nonviolent? I had no idea what the answers were, so I was not testing any hypothesis.
[Guest]: All I knew was I would not find the answers only in the archives, because it was a question I could
[Guest]: discuss with people who had been Khudai Khidmatgars, and I had to find them. Having said that,
[Guest]: I was also aware that all the details of the Khudai Khidmatgar movement, what was happening,
[Guest]: how many people were getting arrested, the scale of it, what jails were being used,
[Guest]: what was the colonial government's response to it, all that would be there in the archives.
[Guest]: In the 90s, when I was doing this work, anthropologists were fighting this battle with
[Guest]: other anthropologists and with historians, saying, no, no, anthropologists also can work,
[Guest]: now it's completely given, it's not an issue. But in those days, you had to be quite defensive about
[Guest]: studying in the archives. So I'd worked in the National Archives in Delhi, and I worked in the
[Guest]: India in London. What I couldn't get was access to the archives in Peshawar. I went to the archives,
[Guest]: I saw the room was slightly open, and there was a pile of dusty pile of files on the floor,
[Guest]: but they would not give me permission on an Indian passport. I was not allowed into the
[Guest]: archives. So that has remained a regret all my life. But what I could do by bending many,
[Guest]: all the visa rules that the government of Pakistan had for Indian citizens, which is that,
[Guest]: you know, if anyone's been there, they'll know that you get three places on your passport.
[Guest]: So I had to fly into Lahore, change flights to Peshawar, and then Wali Khan's house was in
[Guest]: Charsadda. But I was not going to find the Khudai Khidmatgar there, because they had been seen to
[Guest]: be people who had betrayed the cause of Pakistan. They were allies of the Indian National Congress.
[Guest]: They were people who were pro-India. And so the Khudai Khidmatgar or the Red Shirts or the Surkh
[Guest]: Posh, as they were called, faced more violence from the Pakistani state than they did from the
[Guest]: colonial state. And so nobody would own up to be a Khudai Khidmatgar. And, you know, from 1947 to
[Guest]: 1991, when I went, it was a long time, and people had been completely silenced. So it involved
[Guest]: travelling literally village to village to village saying,
[Guest]: who are the elders? Can we talk to them? And I had this wonderful Pashtun man called Habibullah,
[Guest]: whose father had been a Khudai Khidmatgar who had just died before I got there.
[Guest]: So he was always very regretful that I never met his father, but he said he would help me. Thank
[Guest]: goodness, I didn't know what else I would have done otherwise. So Habibullah had a car and we
[Guest]: would just drive from literally one village to the other looking for these, and then we'd sit
[Guest]: down and talk to them. Of course, finally we'd find somebody because they had enough detail and
[Guest]: you realise, OK, he'd gone to jail, he knew. And then we'd say, do you know anyone else who is a
[Guest]: Khudai Khidmatgar? They'd say, oh, there used to be this man, he must be dead and, you know, so on.
[Guest]: We'd say, can we go and check him out? And they'd say, yeah. Have you seen him? No. Do you want to
[Guest]: come with us? Yes. And before you knew it, you know, it would be the end of the day and I would
[Guest]: have half a dozen Khudai Khidmatgars at the back of the car because we had done this snowballing.
[Guest]: Now, these are in the textbooks of anthropology, anthropological methods, you'd say snowballing
[Guest]: is a technique. What that technique becomes in real situations looks very different. In my case,
[Guest]: it was picking up a gaggle of old men by the end of the day and actually letting them.
[Guest]: Thrill was having, I mean, of course, there was my PhD thesis work, but my presence had allowed
[Guest]: old comrades to meet, you know, they had never thought they would meet again. They didn't even
[Guest]: know whether the others were alive. They were all above the age of 75. They were very, very old men.
[Guest]: And many of the conversations I had with them about what was happening in the 1930s and 40s,
[Guest]: did they wear uniform? What was Bacha Khan like? What was the colonial police like? All this.
[Guest]: When, you know, they went on for hours, they were a bit like your podcast, Amit, and, you know,
[Guest]: they went on and on and on, but riveting, and like your podcast too, but they said,
[Guest]: many of them said at the end, many of them, you know, I would, in my very Indian way,
[Guest]: I didn't know how else to say thank you. So, I would always touch their feet at the end of it.
[Guest]: You know, men in their 80s who had given so much of their energy and their time,
[Guest]: they were toothless, poor, had nothing to their names, but they had these incredible stories.
[Guest]: And they would say that, you know, now we can die in peace because somebody has our story.
[Guest]: And we haven't been able to tell this story. So, yes, I know the partition, you know, so much of
[Guest]: our 1947 story is dominated by partition for completely valid reasons. But I had hoped with
[Guest]: the Pathan Unarmed to also tell this other story of silencing, of an enduring legacy of violence
[Guest]: by people who had been so Gandhian, completely contrary to everything they'd been raised with,
[Guest]: and given their lives to it, and suffered for it for the rest of their lives.
[Guest]: They were no heroes. They were not known as freedom fighters. They'd been written out of
[Guest]: history. But here was a chance to recover some of those voices before they died.
[Guest]: So, that's the kind of thing that, you know, anthropology in that sense has no rules about
[Guest]: if you're interested in something, go for it and find out how you can
[Guest]: privilege the voice of those who haven't been heard. And that's why, you know, you mentioned
[Guest]: subaltern history. Of course, this was the heyday of subaltern histories.
[Guest]: And for the historians, it was very important to privilege the voice of the subaltern. And,
[Guest]: you know, it came with the huge influence of Gramsci and social history writing in Europe.
[Guest]: For an anthropologist, there is no other way to write history. So, you know, it was brilliant
[Guest]: work. It absolutely was seminal and formative. But also, there was part of any anthropologist
[Guest]: thought, sorry, we're very happy for the historians, but, you know, this is something that
[Guest]: we kind of have contributed to as well. And so, one of the, you know, is, yes, the subalterns
[Guest]: been silenced and Gayatri Spivak's very famous essay, Can the Subalterns Speak, is read very
[Guest]: widely for very good reasons. But a very small answer to that also is sometimes you just also
[Guest]: have to listen. We literally make possible those conditions in which stories can be told.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, well, by reading this, you know, one of the things I was struck by when you speak of,
[Amit Varma]: when you wrote in the book about speaking with them and all of that was, damn, I wish she had
[Amit Varma]: recorded them and just put it all out there because it would have been, you know, way more
[Amit Varma]: fascinating than even the unseen, what conversations there would have been. And the other thing I was
[Amit Varma]: sort of struck by was that it would make such a fantastic web series because it is fundamentally
[Amit Varma]: such a fantastic story. And there are two arcs to it. And one arc is, you know, you're a young
[Amit Varma]: sort of enthusiastic ethnographer, beginning out, you land up there at Wali Khan's house,
[Amit Varma]: everything that happens there, you immerse yourself in the culture, all of that, you're
[Amit Varma]: doing all of that, but you can't find any Khudai Kidmatkar because, you know, nobody knows of any.
[Amit Varma]: And then you go to this rally, I think it was a fourth anniversary of Badshah Khan's death
[Amit Varma]: in 92. And you go to this rally and you meet Habibullah and he takes you around. And then he
[Amit Varma]: finds a couple of people he remembers through his father and he speaks to them, but you can't speak
[Amit Varma]: to them there. And then he takes you to a village and you find one guy and then you find another
[Amit Varma]: guy. And then you ask this guy, do you know anyone else? And first he says, no, they must all be dead.
[Amit Varma]: And then he says, let's go and see if so-and-so is still there. And you go to another village
[Amit Varma]: and then they meet and they talk and they're sharing memories and you're there. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: they're interjecting when they speak to you. And also that lovely detail of how, you know, you
[Amit Varma]: can't enter the men's section of the house and they can't come into the women's arana. So they
[Amit Varma]: put this cot in this outdoor space. And the custom is you have to sit on the comfortable
[Amit Varma]: part of the cot while they sit on the other one. And these are lovely details. And what if I was
[Amit Varma]: like crafting a web series out of this, I would do an interplay of this and the narrative of the
[Amit Varma]: Khudai Kidmant guards themselves that you earlier mentioned that, you know, 17 years of a successful
[Amit Varma]: nonviolent struggle. But actually after 47, it's then a heartbreaking failed nonviolent struggle
[Amit Varma]: where Babacha Khan goes to jail and eventually an old man, he finally dies in Afghanistan,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in Jalalabad. And even, you know, right at that end that, you know, when he dies that
[Amit Varma]: there is a ceasefire in the Afghan-Soviet war you mentioned so that people can, you know, travel
[Amit Varma]: between Peshawar and Jalalabad, which just shows you sort of the stature of the man. But it also
[Amit Varma]: shows you these lost tragic lives of all these young people who were in that movement. And then
[Amit Varma]: they are treated as criminals by the state that they helped to free. And of course, they oppose
[Amit Varma]: partition and all that. And that's one reason why and then they wanted Pashtunistan and all that.
[Amit Varma]: So it is just such an incredible story. And I would just tell my listeners that,
[Amit Varma]: my God, you know, just go out and read this book if you can get hold of it. You know,
[Amit Varma]: a couple of your books are not even available on Amazon. Why is this? I mean,
[Guest]: maybe that's a conversation that I should have with OUP and maybe you should have a conversation
[Guest]: with OUP who did the Indian edition. I mean, you know, it's very, with this particular book,
[Guest]: it was my first book. I had no bargaining power at all as a first time author, but I absolutely
[Guest]: insisted that there had to be an Indian edition and a Pakistani edition. And in Pakistan in
[Guest]: 2017, when OUP marked 70 years of Pakistani independence, they republished 70 of their
[Guest]: titles and they picked my book as one of them. So it's definitely in print there. And we need
[Guest]: to have it in print more widely in India. And let me say a couple of things to what,
[Guest]: you know, about recording it, right? And it's not as if the idea hadn't crossed my mind.
[Guest]: And I, the entire time that I was in Pakistan, I had the ISI on my tail.
[Guest]: And at one point, and this is not in the book, but I got interrogated. It was, I was in
[Guest]: Waziristan. I was very far from Charsadda and Bali Baba and, you know, that whole infrastructure.
[Guest]: I was way out in Kohat and somebody from Waziristan was going to come and see me. I was
[Guest]: staying in a circuit, circuit house. And suddenly four Bali Punjabi men showed up, you know,
[Guest]: as ISI guys and sat there and interrogated me. Nobody knew they were there in my room for, and
[Guest]: it was very useful not to have recorded anything because there was no, you know,
[Guest]: I could tell them what I was talking about and they could see that I wasn't doing anything
[Guest]: seditious. And the promise I made to them was I was not going to talk about post-47.
[Guest]: You know, I was talking about the independence movement and that was the basis on which I
[Guest]: managed to clear my, you know, dispel some of their suspicion. The reason I managed to dispel
[Guest]: their suspicion was because it was in the middle of Ramzan, as it is now while we are recording
[Guest]: this, and I kept all my roses, you know, in my enthusiasm as a field worker and I said,
[Guest]: right, you know, everybody around me is keeping. So, I was fasting and these men came in and I
[Guest]: knew very quickly that men often cheat, right, and they'll go and sneak off and have a cigarette
[Guest]: or have a cup of tea. And when they refused to leave my room, I said, can I order some tea for
[Guest]: you guys, you know, would you like some? And the guy in the back started to say, yes. Now,
[Guest]: in Pakistan, it's a criminal offence if you are caught eating and drinking during Ramzan. So,
[Guest]: as government officials, you know, this was not a, this was a complete no-no. But he began to
[Guest]: say yes, because my question was very natural as if they had come to my house. And till the
[Guest]: supervisor turned around and glared at him and he stopped. And that's what made them leave.
[Guest]: Because, you know, in a sense, I had learned living with my Pashtun friends that calling
[Guest]: out a man's honour is always a pretty effective way of getting the upper hand, especially if
[Guest]: you're weak as, you know, as I was as an Indian citizen, as a female on my own in that situation.
[Guest]: So, that was hilarious. So, not recording anything and not having any traces was very important. I
[Guest]: was very aware that this was priceless stuff. But I think it was, I don't think I would have got
[Guest]: the wealth of detail I got from them. Also, if I, you know, it was a completely, the moment you put
[Guest]: a, you know this, you know, the moment you put a tape recorder on, there is a self-presentation
[Guest]: that goes on. And here it was, you know, there was laughter and tears and hugs and
[Guest]: marching up and down to show me what this Khudai Khidmatgar army used to look like,
[Guest]: and how they used to do their drills and parades. And so, there was so much going on, which was
[Guest]: entirely the result of that, you know, what academics would call that intersubjective space
[Guest]: between me and my interlocutor. So, and very quickly, they began to realise that the ISI
[Guest]: was tailing me everywhere. So, every time I landed up somewhere, they would check if I was safe and
[Guest]: say, just watch yourself. And I said, yes, I know, but I'm so sorry if you, they said, yes,
[Guest]: they come asking questions after you leave. And I apologised and I said, I'm sorry, you know,
[Guest]: my Pashto was pretty good by then, and I'd apologised for disturbing. And they said,
[Guest]: don't forget, we've dealt with the British police, you know, we can deal with this.
[Guest]: We are not in danger. You are the foreigner here. And the fact, so you look after yourself,
[Guest]: we'll be okay. But, you know, it is very powerful when the blessings of old people are on you as
[Guest]: well. I mean, they blessed me profusely for telling their story. Like you say that, you know,
[Guest]: these are people who've been silenced, having pulled off such an incredible feat.
[Guest]: And you talk about a web series. I mean, it did make me think about
[Guest]: Pashtuns, Pathans, as we call them in India. Pathans in Bombay cinema is such an interesting
[Guest]: phenomenon. You start with Kabuliwala, right, so the hot-headed Pathan who forms this incredible
[Guest]: bond with this little girl, but ultimately has to go to jail because of his hot-headed nature and,
[Guest]: you know, killing a man because somebody had insulted his honour.
[Guest]: So this was the image of the Pathan that everybody works with. So even Tagore's very
[Guest]: very empathetic account of it and the very moving story that he wrote that was adapted.
[Guest]: Ultimately, is that stereotype of a Pashtun, of a hot-headed but affectionate man you can trust
[Guest]: with a little girl. That's the other thing, you know, that at no point was Mini's own safety ever
[Guest]: in question. Then you begin to see that, you know, the occasional Pathan shows up in Bombay
[Guest]: films in various ways and then often the Pathan is the Muslim, because often, as we know,
[Guest]: for many decades there was always a Muslim character in the biggest masala films.
[Guest]: And then, you know, with films like My Name is Khan and so on, where the Khan, the Muslim,
[Guest]: is the main protagonist. He's not a walk-on character actor, he's the main protagonist.
[Guest]: And then they kind of disappear. This whole grammar of Amar Akbar-Anthony grammar disappears
[Guest]: from Bombay cinema. And I was very, you know, interested to see that after ages, in the latest,
[Guest]: one of the latest films to be released, Gangubai, in which Alia Bhatt features, and of course the
[Guest]: film is around her and, you know, that's the story, but what the main relationship she has
[Guest]: that enables her is her relationship with a Pathan gangster in Bombay. And that relationship
[Guest]: between those two characters, played by Alia Bhatt and Ajay Devgn, Ajay Devgn is exactly,
[Guest]: he is a man capable of incredible violence, but it is in the past, so his reputation is that
[Guest]: he's capable of violence and he unleashes that violence on one of his own men precisely because
[Guest]: he dishonoured a woman, that even prostitutes had their honour that you did not dishonour.
[Guest]: And then he is a loyal brother to Gangubai and helps her achieve her ambitions and bankrolls her
[Guest]: election campaign and so on and so forth. So I was very struck that after many decades,
[Guest]: I know by far it wasn't the most important aspect of the film, you know, Gangubai,
[Guest]: it's a story of a woman, but the Pathan has reappeared in Bombay cinema after a long time.
[Guest]: But you're right, we need to have, we need a really decent, ambitious, well-funded biopic
[Guest]: on Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan. It's just the most fabulously cinematic and dramatic story.
[Amit Varma]: It's a mind-blowing story. And just to quickly, you know, fill in those listeners who
[Amit Varma]: may be wondering who's Badshah Khan, what are we talking about? Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan was
[Amit Varma]: known as Frontier Gandhi at one point, which I think is in a sense a little bit of a disservice.
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi could have been called Mainland Badshah or whatever, Mainland Ghaffar and Khan Abdul
[Amit Varma]: Ghaffar Khan was also known as Badshah Khan and he founded this organisation called Khudai
[Amit Varma]: Khidmatgar, which means servants of God in 1930 and grew it very fast, you know,
[Amit Varma]: 1000 people in 1930, you mentioned 25,000 in 1931 and just a tremendous natural politician
[Amit Varma]: and man of the masses and just sort of a great figure. And the fundamental question, which of
[Amit Varma]: course you set out to answer is that what you've called a historical riddle, that Pathans are,
[Amit Varma]: you know, violent, macho, you know, all those stereotypes are attached to them.
[Amit Varma]: But how did this non-violent movement emerge from within? Because one of the things that is also
[Amit Varma]: clear is that it's not as if Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan got his ideas from Gandhi or he got his
[Amit Varma]: ideas from the West or wherever, it flowed naturally into what their society was like
[Amit Varma]: and the way that their community lived, which again is against all stereotypes of Islam and
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth. So tell me a little bit about this, then what are the answers that you came up
[Guest]: with to this historical riddle as it were? Okay, so Badshah Khan's response to the
[Guest]: colonial government when the scale fell from his eyes, he could see the level of deprivation more
[Guest]: than anything else, you know, that was to first was to respond by opening schools, right, they
[Guest]: were called Azad schools. So this was in the 20s and he formed alliances with other revolutionaries
[Guest]: like the Fakir of Ipi and so on. Now in those, it's important to go back to that because of
[Guest]: reasons, two important things happened. One was the choice of non-violence at that stage was
[Guest]: entirely strategic, that there is no way we can deal with the, you know, the northwest frontier
[Guest]: province was the most heavily militarized area in British India because it was guarding the
[Guest]: Khyber Pass through which the British feared Soviet interference. So this was where they set
[Guest]: up guide cavalry, this is, it was armed to the teeth. So trying to fight with guns there, rusty
[Guest]: rifles was not going to, so he chose it as a strategic option. The Hijrat movement happened
[Guest]: at that point, right, so it was about the exile, the Hijrat of moving to an Islamic nation like
[Guest]: Afghanistan as a denunciation of the injustices of what was happening in British India and linked to
[Guest]: the Khilafat movement in Turkey. And he realized, he says this in his autobiography, and by the way
[Guest]: a fantastic new English translation is just out and Rowley Books has published it in India and
[Guest]: folio in Pakistan, is that he says, he says like, you know, you realize we've been unwanted guests
[Guest]: very soon in Afghanistan. We were a burden after the first few weeks. The Amir wanted us to go back
[Guest]: and that's when he realized that if you have to fight for independence or fight for justice,
[Guest]: you've got to do it sitting in your own country. But he continued to open these schools and then
[Guest]: got jailed. Now the frontier didn't have any jails at that point, they had to be taken to Punjab.
[Guest]: The Northwest Frontier had so much military, they didn't expect to ever have any civilian unrest.
[Guest]: At that point in the 1920s, remember the Akali movement was going on and Baba Khadak Singh and
[Guest]: other Sikh revolutionaries who had protested against colonial interference in the Gurudwara,
[Guest]: you know, it's called the Gurudwara movement and the Gurudwara governance, had been jailed. And
[Guest]: that was the first instance really where Bacha Khan saw in modern parlance the weaponizing of
[Guest]: non-violence, you know, of how you can use civil disobedience as a way of protest. So the food was
[Guest]: very bad in the jail and they kept saying that we're falling ill, they wouldn't listen. So the
[Guest]: Sikh men refused to wear any clothes and they opened their hair and they wouldn't tie up their
[Guest]: hair and they wouldn't eat any food and they wouldn't wear any clothes and they lined themselves
[Guest]: up and the jailer was desperate. He said, please go back, please. And Bacha Khan says, he says,
[Guest]: you know, I saw how powerful that was. They just used their own bodies to resist, to make a
[Guest]: statement of protest. So this is before he met Gandhi. So once he met Gandhi, what happened
[Guest]: really was that the political philosophy of non-violence, which he had arrived at exactly
[Guest]: as you said, completely on his own, the political philosophy that Gandhi was developing around that
[Guest]: idea of truth, of courage being essential ingredients for protest. You had to have those
[Guest]: on your side. That is something that he felt he learned from Gandhi. So Bacha Khan himself didn't
[Guest]: like the term Frontier Gandhi because he said it seems almost competitive. It seems as if I am
[Guest]: somewhere as good as Gandhiji, but of course I'm not, you know, he's like my older brother. So
[Guest]: this idea, you know, developed into a political philosophy. Of course,
[Guest]: I argue worked very well with Pashtuns because in Pashtunwali, which is the sort of, you know,
[Guest]: the cultural code by which life is organised, there are some key concepts of melmastia,
[Guest]: of hospitality that I mentioned, ghairat, of courage, and of badla, of revenge.
[Guest]: Now what they did was really to take these core concepts of badla and said,
[Guest]: how do we take revenge without killing? So everybody had to withdraw from any blood feuds
[Guest]: they were involved in before they could allow to rejoin the movement and they took the oath
[Guest]: and signed up and so on. Melmastia was really, you know, it was the idea, it was a very
[Guest]: gay, Gandhian deployment of the idea of hospitality where you don't hate the person in front of you
[Guest]: who's the enemy. You show them the injustice of their ways. That very Gandhian idea. That was how
[Guest]: the notion of hospitality was marshalled. And ghairat, you know, of courage is so critical
[Guest]: because we talk about, you know, we talk about the Dandi March and we remember visuals from
[Guest]: Attenborough's films and we talk about civil disobedience and look at what is happening with
[Guest]: protests in India today. It takes a huge amount of strength and courage to face the violence of the
[Guest]: state without hitting back. And this goes for the students who were pulled out of Jamia's libraries
[Guest]: and beaten up by the police. It goes for students everywhere who've been subject to state violence
[Guest]: and violence of the goons, in some cases vigilante violence, not even state. To not hit back,
[Guest]: to be able to have the courage to protest, to go on marches knowing that you may face the brutality
[Guest]: of the state took a certain kind of extraordinary courage that being Pashtun was part of their
[Guest]: self-definition was that. I'm not saying everybody was lived up to it but that is what you aspire to
[Guest]: be. And being Muslim, they got a lot of grief from the mullahs and, you know, the sort of more
[Guest]: conservative reactionary forces in Pashtun society saying, oh these guys have become Hindus,
[Guest]: is there any way to behave and insisted that Bacha Khan, you know, had grown his hair and,
[Guest]: you know, he was becoming Sikh or Hindu and that's why Bacha Khan stopped covering his hair.
[Guest]: And in those days, as we know, all over the subcontinent men always wore a headdress. He
[Guest]: never did. He just gave it up because he said, here you want to see what's on my head, you can
[Guest]: see it. But what they did with Islam was to take the idea of sabr, of patience and say that, you
[Guest]: know, patience is actually a very important, it's a virtue in Islam and to have suboor, to be able
[Guest]: to be patient is important because the real jihad, the jihad-e-Akbar, is the jihad of patience,
[Guest]: of self-restraint. The jihad-e-Azhar is the one that you take revenge, of patla, of a tooth for
[Guest]: a tooth. But to not take a tooth for a tooth, to restrain yourself and be patient and fight for
[Guest]: justice is a much larger jihad. Akbar means big, no? Great. That is the jihad. And those were their
[Guest]: ideas. So, you know, my explanation or my, you know, my analysis of the movement is that really
[Guest]: it is these cocktail of ideas, these ideas of jihad from Islam, the idea of gharat and
[Guest]: mailmastia from Pashtun wali, combined with Gandhian ideas of how to use non-violence as
[Guest]: philosophy of resistance, is what made up this, the sort of driving ideology of the Khudai
[Guest]: Khidmatkar movement. And it was, it didn't require the Pashtun, it played on the strengths of being
[Guest]: a Pashtun. And that's why I think it survived for so long. You didn't have to go and live somewhere
[Guest]: else. You didn't have to be it. You had, it was about self-cultivation. And so the real struggle
[Guest]: was that, was cultivating, experimenting on yourself. Again, you know, a very Gandhian mode.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, you mentioned the Akalis and there's this lovely passage from your book,
[Amit Varma]: which I'll read out where you write, quote, in Dera Ghazi Khan jail, the political prisoners
[Amit Varma]: from the Akali movement refused to take off their black turbans in the prison as instructed by the
[Amit Varma]: guards. When forcibly stripped of them, they protested by removing the rest of their clothes
[Amit Varma]: down to their loincloths and chanting, sar jaave ta jaave, mera Sikh dharam na jaave,
[Amit Varma]: or I may lose my head, but not my Sikh faith, which is again so Gandhian, so moving, this kind
[Amit Varma]: of spontaneous protest. And, you know, there's another sort of passage I want to kind of read
[Amit Varma]: out, which sort of wrote in a sense, you know, addressing that historical riddle, which I think
[Amit Varma]: sums it up so well that I'm just tempted to read it out. So here we go. Quote, Badshah Khan
[Amit Varma]: highlighted the virtue of patience in Islam and stress the idea of the greater Jihad, Jihad-e-Akbar
[Amit Varma]: to help people understand that the real struggle was a spiritual one within, to conquer fear of
[Amit Varma]: the enemy and anger and to forgive them. The movement also utilised the key values of Pashtun
[Amit Varma]: custom of ghairat, courage, majmastia, or hospitality, badal, revenge, nanavatai,
[Amit Varma]: offering refuge to anyone, even the enemy, to treat the colonial government as unwanted guests
[Amit Varma]: who had breached the code of hospitality and needed to be evicted, politely but firmly.
[Amit Varma]: The uncivilised and violent response from the visitors was met with great dignity and
[Amit Varma]: unwavering courage until eventually they did leave in 1947. The revolutionary ideology,
[Amit Varma]: the khudai khidmatgar's fashion was thus rooted organically in their society and therefore readily
[Amit Varma]: communicable and comprehensible to its rank and file. Stop quote. And this speaks to me for so
[Amit Varma]: many different reasons. It speaks to me because we have these stereotypes of Islam, we have these
[Amit Varma]: stereotypes of Pathans and we also have this narrative that many of the values that liberal
[Amit Varma]: people speak about, we are often told that they are imports of the West and they are not relevant
[Amit Varma]: here. You know, even Nehru made this exact argument during the first amendment debates where
[Amit Varma]: he said what free speech and all that, right? And you know, what your book shows is that so many of
[Amit Varma]: these values that we value, as it were, I think I'm saying value too many times, you know, you
[Amit Varma]: don't have to look to the West for them. They come from within us, they are inherent to us,
[Amit Varma]: which was what, you know, Badshah Khan really used and that was just so evocative and it's
[Amit Varma]: just such an incredible epic story. So someone kindly make a great web series of it, though I
[Amit Varma]: should also be careful what I ask for because, you know, some, you know, Karan Johar will then
[Amit Varma]: produce it and make Shah Rukh Khan play the role of Badshah Khan and we'll, you know, and we'll
[Guest]: both regret ever recording this episode. Look, I'm a Shah Rukh Khan fan, so I will never regret
[Guest]: it if, you know, if this means that Shah Rukh Khan has to, I have to brief Shah Rukh Khan on his,
[Guest]: but you know, Shah Rukh Khan's father was a Khudai Khidmatgar.
[Guest]: Really?
[Guest]: Yes, and Shah Rukh Khan doesn't talk about it often, but I managed to confirm this with him
[Guest]: directly.
[Unknown]: Wow.
[Guest]: Yeah, I've asked him this directly and he said it was true and therefore I think if he ever had a
[Guest]: project like this, I don't know, you know, he's making a film at the moment called Pathan and
[Guest]: they're still filming it. There's Deepika Padukone and him. I don't know what the film is about.
[Guest]: I doubt from his eight packs on show that this is, you know, the few publicity stills that we've
[Guest]: been treated to has anything to do with this story. But seriously, I think it is an epic story
[Guest]: and I would, I think Karan Johar has produced some incredible films and it would make for a
[Guest]: tremendous story that, you know, needs to be told and we need to make it attractive for people to
[Guest]: flock to the cinemas. And boy, if anyone can make a film and make sure that people go to watch it,
[Guest]: it's Karan Johar and Shah Rukh Khan. But people need to, I mean, I would be keen because I really
[Guest]: think people need to think about the implications of the story, which are far reaching and absolutely
[Guest]: relevant to today. And I'll tell you this again, I haven't said this in print anywhere, but
[Guest]: when the book came out, I mean, it came out in 2001, January, right? Very early in January. It
[Guest]: was my first book. It was very quiet. Nobody read it. Nobody, you know, there was no social media
[Guest]: to, it wasn't like on Twitter, people would send off a draft of an article and they put up a tweet
[Guest]: saying they've just written an article, you know, it wasn't like that. So there was really no one
[Guest]: to tell. And so I didn't think anyone had read the book really for the first few months. And then
[Guest]: 9-11 happened, right? And the whole narrative of, and as we know, the global Islamophobia started
[Guest]: with 9-11, this legitimised Islamophobia that it's a 21st century phenomenon in very particular ways.
[Guest]: And this essentialising of the Muslim as violent was instant after 9-11. And there was so much
[Guest]: anger and outrage and so on. And so this went on and you can imagine what it was like having
[Guest]: just published a book on non-violent Muslims, you know, and not being able to intervene in this
[Guest]: debate in any way until the New York Times, a journalist of the New York Times
[Guest]: had come across my book and wrote a column about it saying, hang on a second, there's a
[Guest]: counter-intuitive, counterfactual example from history that proves exactly the opposite is the
[Guest]: case. And, you know, it did several things. One is suddenly people sat up and took notice of the book.
[Guest]: But it also, more importantly, de-essentialised Muslims and Islam. But, you know, in an abstract
[Guest]: way, it also said something about academic research. That all those years when, you know,
[Guest]: I couldn't convince the scholarship committees to give me a scholarship to go to England. And,
[Guest]: you know, they kept shortlisting me and kept, like those professors in d.school saying,
[Guest]: how can we fund a project that's doomed to fail? And therefore we love you and you have a brilliant
[Guest]: CV, but we're not going to give you a scholarship. And this kept happening. All those years of
[Guest]: struggling, you know, and wondering whether you're ever going to sleep well again. And just holding
[Guest]: out the hope that you would go to Pakistan one day and do it. It was all driven by a very,
[Guest]: it was just a commitment to an obsession with an idea. You know, I want to understand what
[Guest]: went on there. I want to meet some of these guys. I want to see what it was like. That's all it was.
[Guest]: There was no future beyond it. So, often academic questions are like this. They are questions in
[Guest]: themselves because they have their own integrity and their own curiosity. And you, this is what
[Guest]: we call pure research, I suppose, you know, and somehow pure research is sometimes a bad word
[Guest]: because, you know, are you making the world a better place by doing pure research? Shouldn't
[Guest]: you be finding alternative fuels? You know, why are you working on things that are not obviously
[Guest]: useful? But this was an example of pure research, which suddenly became 100% relevant in the world.
[Guest]: That, at that stage, to recover the example of nonviolent Muslims would have said, oh,
[Guest]: you're scrambling around for examples because you have an agenda. But here this was, it was
[Guest]: already ready-made. And frankly, a lot of those old Khudai Khidmat Gahs had passed away by that
[Guest]: point. But those stories had been told. So, I think that the story has been recovered and it's
[Guest]: there. But it is a story that needs to be retold. None of my Pakistani friends have ever heard of
[Guest]: the Khudai Khidmat Gahs, my contemporaries, nobody. So, when I went to Pakistan, I'd say,
[Guest]: you know, our friends in Oxford would say, where are you? And they would say, sorry, what is this?
[Guest]: And so I would, and some people would have heard of Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan because he was National
[Guest]: Assembly member or because of the Awami National Party, which, you know, his sons formed and so on.
[Guest]: But nobody had a clue. So, it's a story that needs, that across the subcontinent, we need to
[Guest]: engage with because there are multiple lessons for us. And my goodness, this is one of the most
[Guest]: charismatic people to have lived in our countries. No, and you know, I learned so much about him by
[Amit Varma]: reading your book, because obviously I knew who he was and the broad history and all that. But
[Amit Varma]: I just discovered so much more. And the other sort of, like you said, no one in Pakistan has
[Amit Varma]: heard of him. You also point out in your book about how when, you know, the Pakistan government
[Amit Varma]: cracked down on Khudai Khidmat Gah in, you know, post-independence, they destroyed all the
[Amit Varma]: documentation. They'd arrest all of these guys and they'd just destroy all the papers and everything.
[Amit Varma]: So, there is nothing left. Everything is in memory. Everything is in memory. And 50 years
[Amit Varma]: later, these men meet you and they talk to you. And that is just so magical to me that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: that this is happening, that it's unfolding like this and it's such a stroke of luck. So, you know.
[Guest]: Yeah. And also the documentation, everything had been destroyed. And of course, their memories,
[Guest]: you know, I mean, one's got to be also aware that after 50 years of silencing and an old person's
[Guest]: memory. So, you know, I think about how memory works and you've got to be aware of the fact that
[Guest]: so there are ways in which you don't rely, for instance, on an old person's recall of a
[Guest]: particular date or which year. They may get that wrong. But the description of being beaten up by
[Guest]: a police or the fact that, you know, it took me very long to understand my Pashto wasn't so good
[Guest]: and they were obviously speaking in euphemisms that so much of the punishments meted out to
[Guest]: the Khuda Khidmat Gahs who were arrested were sexual, you know, and they were brutally sexual
[Guest]: punishments meted out to these men. And I was trying to understand it and they'd be crying
[Guest]: while they were telling me the story and Habibullah would then sadly piece that,
[Guest]: then they'd be embarrassed because they couldn't talk to me. So, you know, the silencing happens
[Guest]: in so many ways. It's not just the fading of memories. But then because I had already done
[Guest]: the archival research in the India Office archives, I'd gone with my file of notes to
[Guest]: Pakistan. So, I would carry this around with me all the time, you know, I had a big ring binder
[Guest]: with all my notes written in pencil from the archives. And I would, once I would get going
[Guest]: and I'd say, you know, I've been to the archives, can I tell you what was being written about you
[Guest]: at the time and read out bits, thereby creating a sort of post-facto dialogue. And sometimes they'd
[Guest]: nod along and say, oh, yes, yes, yes, that's right. You know, that place is named correctly
[Guest]: or I'd forgotten. But any imputation of motivation or accusations of violence on their part
[Guest]: to discredit them would be met with complete horror and anger after all these years saying,
[Guest]: how dare they report our behaviour? You know, we had to work so hard to learn to be restrained and
[Guest]: they just blithely tell their bosses that they need more money for their military because
[Guest]: they're having to, you know, fire on us because we are firing back and that's just unjust.
[Guest]: So, you can, you know, the sort of point scoring that's possible in this artificial dialogue that's
[Guest]: created. And you are merely a conduit to witness this dialogue. And that's, that was a privilege.
[Guest]: You know, you think, my goodness, my life will never be the same again. When I say, you know,
[Guest]: this was a life altering experience, because after this, how can you ever be the same person
[Guest]: once you've seen something like this and heard these things?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, it just sends a chill up my spine just thinking about it just
[Amit Varma]: and also, you know, the nature of memory. One of the things I learned about memory is that when
[Amit Varma]: you remember something, the first time you remember something, you remember the event.
[Amit Varma]: The next time you remember the memory of remembering it last time and so on and so
[Amit Varma]: forth in this game of Chinese whispers. To find these gentlemen decades later,
[Amit Varma]: sitting back and trying to piece it together and then it becoming a dialogue because you're coming
[Amit Varma]: up with, you know, the clippings you have on it and all of that is just so incredible and
[Amit Varma]: also so cinematic. So before I go on to my next serious question, quick question about,
[Amit Varma]: no doubt the forthcoming web series, I'm perfectly okay, whoever does it, I was kidding. Who would
[Amit Varma]: you want to play you? I knew this was coming. So you've thought about it, that means?
[Guest]: No, I have listened to enough of your podcast to know that that's the kind of question you would
[Guest]: ask. I don't know, it doesn't matter. I'm not, you know, I think as long as you get a wide eyed,
[Guest]: enthusiastic, dark skinned woman, you'll be fine. Hmm. Are there dark skinned women in Bollywood?
[Guest]: Yeah, exactly. Exactly. So maybe it has to be from somewhere else.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe Anushka also produces stuff. Maybe she'll want to play you. Would you want her to play you?
[Amit Varma]: She's a very fine actor. So yeah, why not? Yeah, I think she'd suit the role.
[Amit Varma]: So here's my next question. We just discussed that this is OUP, out of print, what do you do?
[Amit Varma]: And I have a larger sort of question here that many of the guests who come on the show,
[Amit Varma]: including yourself to some extent in the context of this book, I often think that why the hell are
[Amit Varma]: they publishing with academic publishers? You know, they should publish with great publishers,
[Amit Varma]: this book should reach many more people. And it seems to me that there are choices here,
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, academic publishers, the way I see it, and of course, great books come out of
[Amit Varma]: there. And I'm reading, you know, OUP and Rutledge books all the time. But nevertheless, they reach a
[Amit Varma]: limited kind of audience. And they play to this little sort of academic circle jerk that kind of
[Amit Varma]: goes on where you're writing for other academics, you're writing in, you know, academic language,
[Amit Varma]: which is often turgid prose, not at all the case with you, by the way, all your books have been so
[Amit Varma]: riveting, but can be the case with some others. And that's kind of one area. But then there are
[Amit Varma]: academics who then make that extra step and they write for trade publishers, and they'll write for
[Amit Varma]: a Penguin or a Harper Collins, and they'll write in a way that they can reach many more people.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, I often think that, you know, many academics kind of get stuck in that rut
[Amit Varma]: that, oh, okay, I'm going to write a book, and I'll do it for Cambridge University Press,
[Amit Varma]: Oxford University Press, or Princeton, or blah, blah, blah. And they limit their audiences
[Amit Varma]: in that way, when the stories that they're telling all the ideas that they have,
[Amit Varma]: can should reach many more people and will resonate with so much with many more people.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, is this stuff that you've kind of thought about or what would your approach in this
[Guest]: be? You know, if you are a professional academic with a job in a university, you build your
[Guest]: credibility by publishing with academic publishers. And to be perfectly honest, you're not taken
[Guest]: seriously if you publish with non-academic publishers, non-university presses. And also,
[Guest]: the other bizarre thing is that there's an unspoken assumption that even if you publish
[Guest]: with university presses, but your book sells well, then there must be something wrong with it,
[Guest]: because you're communicating too well with your audiences. People actually want to read your
[Guest]: stuff, you know, so there must be something lightweight about it. So, the other thing to say
[Guest]: is that the market for non-academic, non-fiction writing and publishing has only got better and
[Guest]: better and better. So now, and especially in places like India, where global publishers have
[Guest]: realized the size of the market and have very serious operations here in India, that a lot of
[Guest]: non-fiction books are being written by non-academics, mostly journalists, but also by
[Guest]: academics writing for a wider audience, because they're writing for publishers who are able to
[Guest]: market their books in a completely different way, as you asked, to a much wider audience, etc.
[Guest]: So, you can afford to do that when you don't need brownie points from your publications and
[Guest]: credibility in promotions, procedures, and so on. So really, it is only after a certain seniority
[Guest]: that you can afford to do it, is how the story goes. Now, I have not followed this script again.
[Guest]: I did it with the Pathananamda. Actually, the originating publishers were James Curry in
[Guest]: Oxford, and they had this brilliant arrangement where any book they published from Oxford
[Guest]: always was co-published by a publisher based in the country where the book,
[Guest]: the research was done. And in my case, I said, sorry, I can't choose between India and Pakistan,
[Guest]: so we have to do both. And OUP India, as indeed OUP Pakistan, whatever you may say, Amit, have a
[Guest]: reach in marketing, in libraries and institutions that is unparalleled by anyone else.
[Guest]: So, your average, they're not stocked at airport bookshops, it's true. But in terms of reaching
[Guest]: institutions and colleges and district colleges and universities all over the country, they are
[Guest]: brilliant because acquisitions teams don't think, they just have standing orders. Any book that OUP
[Guest]: publishes, so cultivating democracy will have that kind of fate, and that is very important.
[Guest]: But you come across something like Muslim Portraits, which I put together, which I was
[Guest]: adamant that I was going to publish with a publisher who had a bigger reach, and Yoda were
[Guest]: very good in taking it up. The Sari was my experiment. Now, the Sari is based on ethnographic
[Guest]: research. I started, I first went to my village, and I co-wrote it, of course, with Daniel Miller.
[Guest]: And we did all the research for it together. He's also an anthropologist, a very well-known
[Guest]: anthropologist, who's written about a number of things. But in those days, he was writing about
[Guest]: fashion and women's clothing and so on. I had never written about this stuff. I knew about India.
[Guest]: And we did this work together. We did all the writing and the fieldwork together.
[Guest]: But the question there that we were answering was a question that
[Guest]: a huge number of people were curious about. So, it seems silly to go with a niche academic
[Guest]: publisher. But having said that, actually, the publishers that commissioned the book,
[Guest]: in a sense, or, you know, the head of Berg Publishing, Catherine Earle, asked us to write
[Guest]: this book. They were an academic publisher. But Catherine Earle also had the publishing
[Guest]: nous to know that this had to be marketed as what they call a trade book. So, occasional
[Guest]: academic publishers occasionally will have a completely different marketing strategy,
[Guest]: print run, sales strategy for some books. And that's what they decided. Berg Publishers was
[Guest]: then bought over by Bloomsbury later. So, now Bloomsbury sells the Sari. So, and Catherine
[Guest]: Earle continues to be a very senior person in Bloomsbury in London. The Sari was, as you will
[Guest]: see when you read it for anyone who reads it, is not only written in a very different language,
[Guest]: it is illustrated in full colour on every single page. And a designer has designed every page. So,
[Guest]: Arundhath is the designer who worked on it, and Dixie, Benjamin Dix took the photographs for it.
[Guest]: So, it is, it was, it seemed absurd, even though we were two academic anthropologists
[Guest]: teaching in a university, that we should write a book about an object. But actually, it was
[Guest]: not a book about the Sari so much as a book about modernity and Indian women.
[Guest]: You know, it was answering the question, why do Indian women continue, who are so modern,
[Guest]: continue to wear something that looks so antiquated? That's, you know, to put it bluntly,
[Guest]: as one of my students did in London. And she used to teach at the London School of Fashion,
[Guest]: so she knew what she was asking. And so, we decided that we had to write it in a way that
[Guest]: a large number of people could read and made it accessible and also do justice to the beauty of
[Guest]: the garment. That's why it looks the way it does. It's an absolute visual treat, right?
[Guest]: And it sold lots of copies. In academia, it's not considered an academic book.
[Guest]: Even though all the research for it is done according to the protocols of academic
[Guest]: anthropological research, you know, it looks too good and it sells too well, it can't be academic.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and it's written too well. I enjoyed reading it a lot. And, you know, I get the
[Amit Varma]: moment I picked it up, I figured that, yeah, it's going to kind of answer that question of why do
[Amit Varma]: women wear the Sari, not just that it's a traditional garment and women are modernizing
[Amit Varma]: and all that. But, you know, you have one of your characters, Meena, in the first chapter,
[Amit Varma]: talk about how incredibly impractical it is in terms of, you know, some part of my body is always
[Amit Varma]: exposed, whether it's a belly or the waist or whatever. And she gets inside a bus and she's
[Amit Varma]: totally stressed out till she sits down. And it's just so difficult to put on and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And then chapter by chapter, you kind of go through all the different aspects of it,
[Amit Varma]: which is, you know, pretty, which is quite excellent. So, but it's also like a coffee
[Amit Varma]: table book, right? So I bought a physical copy from Amazon and now my Amazon algorithm
[Amit Varma]: is completely messed up because God knows what they'll recommend to me next. But yeah,
[Amit Varma]: thank you for buying it. No, no, of course. And it's an enjoyable read. I just like read it in
[Amit Varma]: one sitting and it's great. You know, you've reproduced the voices of some of the people you
[Amit Varma]: speak to and that kind of really worked for me. And, you know, so a book I enjoyed reading,
[Guest]: even though I'm a man, as it were. Good. No, I think, and we spoke to a number of men,
[Guest]: you know, when we did the research, we thought it was really important because women wear
[Guest]: saris for themselves. They wear saris for people around them. And of course, the men have a view
[Guest]: on this. So it was important to engage the men in conversation. And I said in this was the book,
[Guest]: I think that was the hardest for me in terms of making sure that it was based on research,
[Guest]: because it is so autobiographical for me, because I remain and the reason why the book even came
[Guest]: about, you know, like I said, the student of mine asked me this question, because I remain to this day
[Guest]: very committed to wearing a sari to work in London. And, you know, none of my friends do.
[Guest]: A lot of my friends wear saris, they'll wear it in the evenings for social occasions.
[Guest]: But I wear it not as costume, not as dressing up, but as clothing, you know. And so to take public
[Guest]: transport and, you know, to go up and down escalators on the London Underground and do it,
[Guest]: it's partly possible because it's London. London is the kind of city where being yourself is to
[Guest]: be a Londoner. There is no one way to be. That's what makes London's amazing city it is.
[Guest]: People are confused because it's older sort of Gujarati women, you know, the sort of old
[Guest]: immigrant families who the elderly women wear saris. What people initially struggled with,
[Guest]: I think, in the initial years when they spot me on the Underground was to be wearing a sari,
[Guest]: but reading The Economist, you know, this wasn't this wasn't what part of anyone's imagination.
[Guest]: So one had to sort of respond to a lot of these challenges. Now it's become
[Guest]: entirely normalised. And I think one of our best lines in the book is what we say about
[Guest]: wearing a sari is a bit like driving a car. It's difficult to do. You have to learn to do it. But
[Guest]: the more you do it, the better you get at doing it. And this is exactly my experience and loads of
[Guest]: other women's experiences. But as an anthropologist, I was very clear that this is what had got us
[Guest]: started on the journey. But it had to be a story about a wide cross section of Indian women. And
[Guest]: that's why we spent so much time and money travelling across India, very carefully making
[Guest]: sure we were talking to different kinds of demographics of women, construction workers,
[Guest]: paddy farmers, you know, these are the women who wear nothing else but a sari. They are not the
[Guest]: most visible when you think about our cities. But and people say, oh, in cities, women don't wear
[Guest]: saris. And you're thinking, have you looked at the woman who comes and cleans your house or the
[Guest]: press valley or the one selling vegetables or the one on construction sites? They're all, you know,
[Guest]: the middle class may not, but actually, numerically, the number of Indian women. And
[Guest]: therefore, it was a real challenge to try and understand. I know why I choose to wear a sari
[Guest]: in London and go to work. But to try and understand why a construction worker chooses to wear a sari
[Guest]: was a completely different set of questions. And that needed to be understood. And I think this is,
[Guest]: I'm glad that you found it readable, because we want people to read it and to think about
[Guest]: these lives that are so invisible, you know, they're there. And yet, we don't really stop
[Guest]: to think. So blithely, people say, oh, you're going to Bangalore. Why are you going to Bangalore?
[Guest]: Everybody, you know, women don't wear saris in Bangalore, because this was at the height of the
[Guest]: IT revolution. And so, we just did a census count of standing on a street for a few hours.
[Guest]: And of course, young college girls were not wearing saris, but
[Guest]: there was, you know, it was like 9 to 1, the number of women in the public who wore a sari.
[Guest]: So our imagination of what is happening in India, what is happening with women, etc.
[Guest]: needs to be challenged. And only academic research or any research, not serious research,
[Amit Varma]: can challenge them. Yeah, I mean, the reason I like the book is not that it gave me insight into
[Amit Varma]: the sari, but that it gave me insight into society and the way people live and the different sort of
[Amit Varma]: things that a sari represents. You've spoken about how, you know, the maid and the mistress
[Amit Varma]: will wear different kinds of saris and the mistress will automatically assume when she's
[Amit Varma]: giving a Diwali gift that, you know, there's a particular kind of sari. So, you know, just that
[Amit Varma]: dynamic reveals so much. You've spoken about the sari as sort of how it reflects modernity,
[Amit Varma]: like you named, you know, one of my favorite films from one of my favorite filmmakers,
[Amit Varma]: Mahanagar by Shruti Jitra, where you speak about how the main character, when she starts working
[Amit Varma]: and she's getting successful and self-confident, she changes the style of sari she wears, which
[Amit Varma]: people in the house notice. And that kind of spoke to me. You also got this lovely chapter
[Amit Varma]: on the pallu with this great quote, which one of the people you were speaking to told you,
[Amit Varma]: and she said, quote, it is as if by caressing a leaf, one is touching the tree.
[Guest]: So this is the role of the pallu. That is a good line. I'd forgotten that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I love that line. And then you speak about how there's a sex worker you spoke to in Kolkata
[Amit Varma]: who doesn't allow clients to touch her pallu because it's only going to be for whoever she
[Amit Varma]: marries. And that spoke to me. And I'm going to come to my next question for you via the sari,
[Amit Varma]: in fact, where at one point you have this fascinating passage about the sex worker
[Amit Varma]: who says that she, you know, one of her clients whom she slept with for 300 bucks and not slept
[Amit Varma]: with as it happens, but who gave her 300 bucks, was a famous actor who just made her wear a white
[Amit Varma]: sari with a red border, nothing underneath, and then fantasized himself in different kinds of
[Amit Varma]: situations with her, you know, different kinds of public situations. We're going to a temple was one
[Amit Varma]: of them where she's wearing a transparent white sari with a red border. And that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the whole sexualized role in this role playing fantasy kind of fascinated me. And that led me
[Amit Varma]: to think about this book, which came out a couple of years ago, called Everybody Lies by Seth
[Amit Varma]: Stephens Davidowitz. I think that's his name. And what he really did was he did a kind of
[Amit Varma]: ethnography while sitting at his laptop, in the sense that he got Google and Facebook and all of
[Amit Varma]: the you know, a bunch of these to give you to give him access to anonymized search data,
[Amit Varma]: from which he could figure out what people were searching for. Because his thesis, which I find
[Amit Varma]: has a lot in it, is that people are most themselves, when they are searching for something
[Amit Varma]: on the internet, and they think no one's looking, right. And then through that, he came up with some
[Amit Varma]: incredibly startling insights. And, you know, I'll link an essay I wrote on the book from the
[Amit Varma]: show notes in the book itself. Some really bizarre stuff, like one of the things which is just nuts
[Amit Varma]: is that India and Bangladesh are outliers in the sense that grown adult men fantasize constantly
[Amit Varma]: about being breastfed. Right? It's completely bizarre. The rest of the world is nothing like
[Amit Varma]: it. But you look at the searches from here. So it's sort of eye opening in that sense. And that
[Amit Varma]: got me to thinking about ethnography. And you've, of course, written a lot about ethnography. And
[Amit Varma]: at least a couple of these books, you have these sections on it, which I learned a lot from.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that you're doing in ethnography is that you are number one,
[Amit Varma]: you're talking to these people, and you're taking their words seriously, and all of that. But number
[Amit Varma]: two, you're also observing them in action and seeing what they do. It's their words and their
[Amit Varma]: action coming together. And, you know, and I know ethnographers will react to shock and horror at
[Amit Varma]: the next thing I'm about to say. But it seems to me that this is something that AI can actually,
[Amit Varma]: you know, take over a large part of this, because what Stevens Davidowitz managed to do is something
[Amit Varma]: that no army of human ethnographers could possibly have done in terms of the insight that he got
[Amit Varma]: through their actions and through what they are searching for. So how do you think about this,
[Amit Varma]: that we have tremendous technology, so many tools available to us of, you know, gaining insights
[Amit Varma]: into the human condition and all of these interesting ways. Is this something that you've
[Amit Varma]: thought about? And, you know, are these tools that ethnographers use, and so on and so forth?
[Guest]: Sure. I mean, in fact, digital ethnography is a growing area, and some of our students are
[Guest]: thinking with this, and it's a generational thing, really. But one thing to say about this question
[Guest]: is that insight is not the preserve of any one methodology. I think you can have insight through
[Guest]: algorithms, you know, AI can actually, the scale, whenever you need scale, using artificial
[Guest]: intelligence makes absolute sense. And you begin to see patterns. In my own way, it wasn't artificial
[Guest]: intelligence, but my whole engagement with the survey method was this. And I'll explain it,
[Guest]: because it directly answers your question, that there are some things that you need scale for,
[Guest]: you need the macro picture. And there are some things which only an ethnographer can tell you.
[Guest]: And the biggest example of this in my work was when Lokniti found this finding, right, that
[Guest]: low-caste, female, illiterate, rural voters were more likely to vote than anyone else.
[Guest]: It's very interesting. This was what you can find from this big data, huge national sample,
[Guest]: brilliantly sampled, etc. Statistically, it was true. And so the moment I saw this, my question
[Guest]: to my colleagues in Lokniti was, why is this happening? Why are these people – and this,
[Guest]: we don't know, this is a why question, it's not what surveys ask. That's a bad survey question.
[Guest]: And here is when we need qualitative research, we need ethnographers to go in. So that's what
[Guest]: took me into doing this. Now, my first hypothesis after seven years, seven, eight years of work,
[Guest]: when I published this article called Sacred Election in 2007, was to say that elections
[Guest]: have a sacrosanct status in India. And so people think that if there's an election, you must,
[Guest]: of course, you must vote. You know, it's like, why would you not light a diya on Diwali? It's
[Guest]: that kind of attitude. It's not religious, but it's sacrosanct. It's inviolate.
[Guest]: And people said, you know, people who read that article said, yeah, that's
[Guest]: very convincing. It rang true with a lot of people who've spent any time studying Indian politics.
[Guest]: But this kind of articulation of arguments, maybe this is a Bengal thing. This is, you know,
[Guest]: they have communists, so, you know, Bengalis are very clever, you know, all these kind of
[Guest]: things that you say that actually make no sense. But anyway, people said, maybe all of these things
[Guest]: are true. And what they were basically saying is, how do we know this is true of anyone other than
[Guest]: your village? You've said it on the basis of doing fieldwork in one place. So the only way to say,
[Guest]: and my hunch as a scholar studying Indian society was this can't be an exception to my village.
[Guest]: But I had to prove it with evidence. As an ethnographer, I couldn't obviously physically
[Guest]: go and do fieldwork in multiple places. I don't know that many languages. You have to
[Guest]: speak the local language. So there, what I needed to do was to recruit a team of 12 ethnographers
[Guest]: who all spoke local languages. And they then took my conclusion as their hypothesis.
[Guest]: And it was an experiment. And they said, so all of them, all 12 of them asked the same four
[Guest]: questions during an election, including why do you vote, but what was happening in a polling station,
[Guest]: and how the election was conducted. When we met to debrief at the end of the research,
[Guest]: none of us had any idea what we had found, what we had each found. It is only in the sharing of
[Guest]: our findings by the end of day one, we realized, oh my goodness, you know, India has remarkable
[Guest]: consistency in this thing, and then wrote it up as why India votes. But then I could,
[Guest]: so people feel this sacrosanct, people feel this inviolate commitment.
[Guest]: But then you think, where is it coming from? Where are notions of inviolate commitment
[Guest]: nurtured in human life, in social life? How do people learn that some things you can't mess with?
[Guest]: And for that, you know, people don't sit down and tell you stories about this kind of thing.
[Guest]: You've got to learn to observe life and see what is going on. And that's when one took that back
[Guest]: into the village as an ethnographer, in a place that I knew so well, and I wasn't asking people,
[Guest]: so what makes you so committed? Because I was working and living with paddy farmers,
[Guest]: and I could see that, you know, growing paddy is all about inviolate commitment. You can't say that,
[Guest]: you know, oh, today is too hot, I can't go and check whether the water is flowing in the channels,
[Guest]: it should. You have to go and check because one day's delay and you can ruin it. So there are
[Guest]: certain things, you know, as a farmer that are, it's about being inviolately committed to farming,
[Guest]: and you don't have a choice. And that's where it goes back to an insight where you're beginning
[Guest]: to see in that holistic anthropological way, how different bits, how that inviolate commitment of
[Guest]: farming is then taken to how they say run their religious festivals, or how they learn to act
[Guest]: politically when there's a crisis. And all of these come together when there is an election.
[Guest]: I mean, an election is after all a momentary thing. It's not once in five years, because
[Guest]: we vote in India at three tiers of democracy. So people are voting, you know, every couple of
[Guest]: years, if anything. But still, it is episodic. But what is happening in between elections is
[Guest]: what is shaping people's sensibility and that you have to be there, observe, make the connections,
[Guest]: infer. This artificial intelligence couldn't do. So depending on what question you're asking and
[Guest]: what kind of insight you're trying to generate, you use different methods. Exactly, I was being
[Amit Varma]: slightly glib. So sure. And, and you kind of, you know, touched upon both your books over here,
[Amit Varma]: why India votes and then, you know, cultivating democracy. And I found why India votes particularly
[Amit Varma]: interesting, because it tackles, you know, the central question, as you articulated is, quote,
[Amit Varma]: why do poor people bother with voting when elected governments don't seem to be making
[Amit Varma]: their lives any better? Stop quote. And that's a question that's always been there, you know,
[Amit Varma]: public choice service will call, talk about rational ignorance that every individual knows
[Amit Varma]: that one vote is not going to decide an election. So it is not rational to even think about issues
[Amit Varma]: or look into them, you just got to get on with your life. Though, after I mentioned this somewhere,
[Amit Varma]: a friend pointed out that there was some really local teeny weeny level election in Rajasthan,
[Amit Varma]: which was divided, which was decided by one vote, and the losing candidates wife and her sister
[Amit Varma]: didn't go to vote. So, you know, kya hua hoga ghar pe one only knows. And there's also,
[Amit Varma]: book is full of these lovely quotes, you also talk about how politics has a bad rap,
[Amit Varma]: and you have this quote from the 65 year old guy, who tells you quote, politics is the most
[Amit Varma]: abominable thing in the country and elections are the only means to extend that. Why should I waste
[Amit Varma]: my time on deciding which snake is the most venomous one? Which is, I love that so much.
[Amit Varma]: And what I loved is that my God, you come up with a menu of these wonderful explanations,
[Amit Varma]: all of which kind of make sense, you know, inertia, instrumentality, loyalty, protest,
[Amit Varma]: affectivity, and the community ones were the ones that I was sort of, you know, most interested in,
[Amit Varma]: where, you know, at one point, you write quote, the relationship between community and vote,
[Amit Varma]: though, as we know from Rajni Kothari's recent remarks, can be a more complex and straightforward
[Amit Varma]: match between the caste of the candidate and that of the community of the voter. As he put it,
[Amit Varma]: politics is affected by caste, but the reverse is also true. One significant way in which we
[Amit Varma]: can see how caste is affected by politics is by observing how much the act of voting together
[Amit Varma]: as a group was valued by people, regardless of whom they were voting for, or whether they were
[Amit Varma]: using their votes instrumentally or not. The elections marked an important moment to express
[Amit Varma]: and make manifest a generic collective identity. The votes in these cases became a modern extension
[Amit Varma]: of older rules surrounding marriage and commensality that were practiced to express
[Amit Varma]: group solidarity. It was as much an expression of a general sense of collectivity as an assertion
[Amit Varma]: of any particular identity. As a middle-aged man put it, and this reminds me of this anecdote,
[Amit Varma]: you know, so I'll digress briefly to bring this light touch into it, that there used to be this
[Amit Varma]: video news magazine in the early 90s called NewsTrack. Do you remember that? Yes. So,
[Amit Varma]: I remember a NewsTrack episode where, you know, when Devilal was deputy prime minister,
[Amit Varma]: he'd made his son Om Prakash Chautala the chief minister of Haryana. So, there was this interview
[Amit Varma]: of Devilal ji where he was basically I think in a banyan and a dhoti and he was sitting in the
[Amit Varma]: garden with his leg up and the camera angle was right next to the shoe. So, you have a massive
[Amit Varma]: shoe and in the distance you have Devilal's head and the question they asked him was,
[Amit Varma]: ki aapne apne chhore ko chief minister kyu banaya? And his answer was, toh kya Bhajanlal ke chhore ko banao? You can't argue with that.
[Amit Varma]: And at a later point, you had another person tell you ki, you know, jaat apni beti aur apna vote sirf jaat ko hi deta hai,
[Amit Varma]: which translated means a jaat gives his daughter in marriage and his vote in an election to only
[Amit Varma]: another jaat. So, tell me about this community angle and what it means as, you know, self-expression
[Amit Varma]: because, you know, one hypothesis one has heard about voting is like that voting for your party
[Amit Varma]: is the same as, you know, going to watch a football club in action. So, if you're a Manchester United
[Amit Varma]: fan and my sympathies to them right now, but if you're a Manchester United fan, you know, going to
[Amit Varma]: a match is really the same thing as going to your voting. You're sort of expressing your allegiance
[Amit Varma]: to a tribe and you're part of that group and all of that. So, tell me about your kind of findings
[Amit Varma]: of this and how this then, you know, counteracts against the rational reasons for not voting.
[Guest]: Okay, so the rational reasons for not voting are, you know, come out of a literature that
[Guest]: has been discredited really. I mean, you know, the more work you do sociologically, it just doesn't
[Guest]: make sense because nobody makes decisions in the way that they imagine individuals making decision,
[Amit Varma]: you know. I think if I might, what public choice theorists would say is that they would
[Amit Varma]: not argue that people are rational. They would say it is not rational to vote yet people are
[Guest]: voting. So, you're acknowledging the reality from both angles. Yes, it's just that
[Guest]: you can extend, you know, part of what anthropology does, of course, is extend
[Guest]: the definition of what is rational. You know, what is rational and we found this,
[Guest]: bizarrely, even with the saree book. Say, oh, it's not, it doesn't make sense to wear a saree
[Guest]: and what makes sense, what is rational in one context is not rational in another. So,
[Guest]: that's all one was flagging. But it is about, see, I'll tell you, let me give you an anecdote from
[Guest]: Why India Votes, which I think still is one of the loveliest anecdotes, which one of the
[Guest]: researchers in the team collected, Mekhla Krishnamurthy, working in Harda Mandi. And it
[Guest]: was, she'd been doing fieldwork for her PhD for a while there. And then one day, on the day of the
[Guest]: election, she found this woman, Rukmini Bai, whose job it was, there was a very male space, but there
[Guest]: were two women and her job was to, you know, at the end of the weighing and selling of grain all
[Guest]: day, all the grain would fall on the floor and she would sweep it all up and it would be weighed
[Guest]: and whatever the value of that grain, she'd get half of it. This is how she made her wages.
[Guest]: So, she found this woman, Rukmini Bai, in tears, unable, because she couldn't vote.
[Guest]: And Mekhla said, what happened? And she said, oh, I didn't have the right paperwork and various
[Guest]: whatever. And she was inconsolable. So, when she was asked why it mattered so much, you know, she
[Guest]: says, after all, it was only one vote, you know, and it's only one election. It'll come back again,
[Guest]: you know, next time you can vote. And she said, you see what work I do. I spend all day running
[Guest]: after every grain that falls on the ground. And I know that that final heap, the value of which
[Guest]: determined her livelihood, is made up of every little grain. So, my vote is like that. Now,
[Guest]: this sentiment, now this is one thing which is about quantifying, that, you know, every vote
[Guest]: makes up a thing. The other thing was in your neighborhood, don't know about your neighborhood,
[Guest]: but certainly in your city, in Mumbai, I was there once on a thing in Bandra, talking to outside a
[Guest]: polling station, a man who literally his shoes had fallen apart. He was sitting on the pavement
[Guest]: inconsolably crying. Because you remember some elections ago, there'd been a big problem with
[Guest]: voters lists and some very important people also couldn't vote. So, it became a big story. Anyway,
[Guest]: he was a casualty. And I sat down with him on the pavement and I was talking and he said,
[Guest]: and I said, look, it's okay, you know, your next election, I'm sure they'll sort out the
[Guest]: paperwork, your name will be on the list. And he looked at me, he said, you just don't get it, do
[Guest]: you? Look at me, I have nothing. I don't even own a pair of shoes I can wear. These are falling
[Guest]: apart. I sleep on people's floors, in different chawls, in different, every night in a different
[Guest]: place. I have nothing to my name. But I am, I have a vote. And I am on that list. And nobody
[Guest]: can take that away from me. And that was taken away from me today. And without me, how can there
[Guest]: be an election? So, I said, look, but there's going to be a result anyway, whether or not you
[Guest]: voted, right? So, it's not like you're not voting and stopping anything. He said, yes, but I won't
[Guest]: be part of that result. I'm not part. So, that sense of attachment is, you know, that is the
[Guest]: relationship of the individual vote and the collective result that I want to emphasize.
[Guest]: The second thing that is very, very important, which goes back to what we were saying about
[Guest]: the polling station a while ago, is that it is this extraordinary space of where every Indian
[Guest]: citizen, for the only time in their entire lives, experiences political equality. They know it,
[Guest]: they have, they're politically equal on paper, but it's the only time they actually see it at
[Guest]: work. And it's a fleeting glimpse. So, a lot of the enthusiasm for going to vote is to experience
[Guest]: that, you know. So, in itself, it is meaningful. Even before you start asking questions of who
[Guest]: you're going to vote for, you're voting because you want to have that experience of feeling good.
[Guest]: The third reason, which I think your football allegiance is very opposite,
[Guest]: is what I found in West Bengal looking at vote share figures for 20, 30 years. As we know,
[Guest]: the left front bunch of communist parties in West Bengal ruled for 34 years, from 1977 to 2011.
[Guest]: When I started research in West Bengal in 1998, the left front looked invincible. You know,
[Guest]: they completely dominated everything and every election, and they won, increasing their margins.
[Guest]: But throughout those left front 34 years, Congress, which was the main opposition party, initially,
[Guest]: polled 40% of the votes. This is like being a Manchester United supporter today.
[Guest]: This is like being a Manchester United supporter today. You don't change your club because they're
[Guest]: not in the top three. You support them because you support them. It's your club.
[Guest]: And you live, of course, in the hope that next year they will do better.
[Guest]: And as people said, how can you stop voting for the party because they're not winning?
[Guest]: How will they know? So, there are various reasons. One is, it's my party. Second,
[Guest]: the people in power should know that there are other parties we support. Third, we live in a
[Guest]: democracy. Democracy is about multi-parties. If you stop voting for parties that are small,
[Guest]: or stop voting for independent candidates, then how will we get a diversity of choice?
[Guest]: People will lose heart and leave. So, these are the kind of explanations people give.
[Guest]: And so, here, in this case, one can say a lot about caste and community, and, you know,
[Guest]: we can talk about that. I want to talk about that in some other context of the Republic,
[Guest]: rather than about caste. But in this case, I think the community of voters made up of
[Guest]: being citizens and feeling attached and feeling part of it is of huge motivation.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I find that story quite moving of the guy, you know, sitting with torn shoes on a
[Amit Varma]: pavement and saying that, I don't have this, I don't have that, I don't have this, but I have
[Amit Varma]: a vote, you know. And I think elsewhere, you know, you've termed it bureaucratic existentialism,
[Amit Varma]: that if I, you know, exist on the voter ballot, I exist. And this exactly reminds me of another
[Amit Varma]: digression. Have you heard of the Uttar Pradesh Mitak Sangh? No. This is the Uttar Pradesh
[Amit Varma]: Association of Dead People. This is a story I enjoy telling. So, there was a gentleman named
[Amit Varma]: Lal Bihari, I think born 1951, or something like that. And around 1973-74, sometime in the 70s,
[Amit Varma]: this tragic thing happened to him, that his cousins, they had him declared dead,
[Amit Varma]: and they took over his land. So now, Lal Bihari, as his name was, Lal Bihari has to prove he is
[Amit Varma]: alive. So how does he do this? Well, one, he organizes his own funeral in Munnabhai and
[Amit Varma]: Gandhiism style, that doesn't work out. He applies for compensation for his widow,
[Amit Varma]: then widow in quote marks, then he throws stones at a police station so that if he gets arrested,
[Amit Varma]: they have, you know, they're recording his existence. Then he kidnaps his cousin. And
[Amit Varma]: what happens after he kidnaps his cousin, who's a 10 year old boy, is that he realizes the uncles
[Amit Varma]: don't give a shit about the kid and whatever. And he's there with the kid for a few days. So
[Amit Varma]: he buys him ice cream and sends him home. And then this goes on for many years. And in like in 1988,
[Amit Varma]: he decides I'm going to stand for elections. So he stands against VP Singh in Allahabad in 1988.
[Amit Varma]: So presumably at some level, his name is out there, but he's still not recognized legally as
[Amit Varma]: alive. He stands against Rajiv Gandhi from Amethi in 1989, loses again, because hey,
[Amit Varma]: dead men don't win. And by this time, he realizes that there are many other people like him. So he
[Amit Varma]: founds this thing called the Uttar Pradesh Mitak Sangh, which is an association of legally dead
[Amit Varma]: people. And at one point in time, they had more than 20,000 members. And finally, Lal Bihari came
[Amit Varma]: back to life in 1994. And I hope he's hale and hearty today. But this kind of this is so dystopian,
[Amit Varma]: it tells you that this is not you know, we take this shit for granted that of course, we exist,
[Amit Varma]: of course, you know, we are legal people, as it were, but life is so precarious for most people.
[Amit Varma]: So I totally get that sentiment, it breaks my heart, the sentiment of somebody saying that
[Amit Varma]: I exist because I have a vote. It's just, you know, beautiful.
[Guest]: But it's, yeah, it is, I think it's a very powerful idea. It's obviously equally shameful
[Guest]: that it's about that invisibility, invisibilization that that is so effectively achieved in India,
[Guest]: where you don't see the guy operating the lift, you don't see the guard at the mall,
[Guest]: you just don't see them as people, you don't know, you know, you can employ people for years and not
[Guest]: know what their surname is, right, you know them by their first name. So there are all these ways.
[Guest]: And therefore, you can see why, you know, one thing that a lot of people have said to me across
[Guest]: the country is, when you go and they check out your name, check your name on the voters list,
[Guest]: when you go into the polling booth, and then the second polling officer calls out your name
[Guest]: to indicate that you are the person going. And so many people have said, you know,
[Guest]: it's the only time I've heard my whole name being called out, it sounded very nice.
[Guest]: Just that. And if you think, if you've been, you know, doing Jhaadu Pocha in somebody's house,
[Guest]: and that woman just knows you as Sushma, and doesn't even know whether you have a surname,
[Guest]: that's the existence of, this is, so why would that person not value being seen as a whole person,
[Guest]: who is not there because of what she does, what her caste is, you know, what kind of sari she's
[Guest]: wearing, but the fact that she is there, and she belongs to the voters list. And that,
[Guest]: that bureaucratic existentialism, there's a hilarious, you know, your story, I remember
[Guest]: actually hearing you tell that story on a previous episode that I heard. No, and I remember thinking
[Guest]: that my term bureaucratic existentialism was perfect for it. And there is this wonderful
[Guest]: Shyam Benegal film called Well Done Abba. I don't know if you've seen this, where it is,
[Guest]: it's Baman Irani and this one in Hyderabad, trying to, it's basically dealing with the Indian state
[Guest]: about, I think, a tube well that should have been dug and wasn't dug. It was, you know, one of these
[Guest]: public projects. But it was all about bureaucratic existentialism. It's a bit long winded,
[Guest]: the film, but brilliantly achieved. So I have a sort of micro question,
[Amit Varma]: just diving into one curious fact that I sort of, that came up in this book, which is, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: there are a number of points that bear thinking about, like you've pointed out that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the more local an election is, the more voters will turn out and all that. But I was struck by
[Amit Varma]: the fact that more women vote, especially more rural women vote, and they take it so seriously,
[Amit Varma]: like in cultivating democracy, I think you talk about how most women in those villages,
[Amit Varma]: they'll have like two sarees for everyday wear, which they'll rotate between and one saree for
[Amit Varma]: special occasions, which is if it's whatever the special occasion is, and they wear that special
[Amit Varma]: saree for the day they go to the polling booth to vote, you know, which is also which tells you
[Amit Varma]: something, which tells you the, you know, the importance of the sacredness and the role that
[Amit Varma]: it plays in their lives. And one can imagine that because people like us take equality for granted,
[Amit Varma]: but for them, they are equal at a polling booth with everybody, you know, the maim sahib and the
[Amit Varma]: maid, they will both have to stand in line and the same amount of time. And my question, therefore,
[Amit Varma]: is this and this is, you know, when I did an episode with the data journalist Rukmini,
[Amit Varma]: she pointed out that people often talk about women vote banks, but women are not a monolithic
[Amit Varma]: vote bank per se, different places and vote for different kinds of reasons and all of that,
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth. And an earlier guest Shruti Kapila also spoke about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: her interest in women voting and whether they can be mobilized. So I want to ask you the why here,
[Amit Varma]: that why do so many, like beyond all of these reasons that we have kind of discussed,
[Amit Varma]: why do more women vote? Why do more rural women vote, you know, beyond all of these? So what are
[Guest]: sort of your thoughts? Okay, so I do have thoughts because I've just published a paper on this,
[Guest]: on this very question in the April issue of seminar. And there are three reasons I propose.
[Guest]: The first is, what is, if you look at the figures, women's turnout has been rising from 2009 onwards,
[Guest]: and it is steadily rising, and in some places it has outstripped men, right? So now more women are
[Guest]: voting than men in many states in India. And I think this was true of 2019 as well, but I have to
[Guest]: and I think this was true of 2019 as well, but I have to check at the national level.
[Guest]: Now I propose three reasons. One is that the decade that, from 2009, if you keep looking,
[Guest]: since 2009 what has also been happening is that women's labor participation ratio rates
[Guest]: has been falling. Now this is not a causality, it is a correlation, but I think it's a very
[Guest]: interesting correlation that women, as they are, and if you look at the people who are doing work
[Guest]: on women's labor participation rates, they are not voluntarily withdrawing necessarily,
[Guest]: there are structural reasons that shut them out. That would be a fair conclusion.
[Guest]: So just at the time that women are being shut out of the economy for various ways,
[Guest]: their utilization of their political voice through the vote is going up. That's number one.
[Guest]: The second thing is, this is also the decade and beyond when you're about 10 years and therefore
[Guest]: two cycles of elections after when the 73rd and 74th amendments, i.e. local institutions and local
[Guest]: institutions and local democracy, is instituted. Of course in local elections there is reservation
[Guest]: for women. We don't have that at the national and the regional levels, but there's 33% to 50%
[Guest]: in some cases. So while you had that initial, oh there are Pradhanpathis and actually women stand
[Guest]: because that's a women's seat, but men are firing from their shoulders, etc., that was true. I mean,
[Guest]: as like with any reservation, that is, it takes time to mature. But I would argue that the fact
[Guest]: that women see other women standing for elections, number one. Number two, they see that there is
[Guest]: reservation and therefore women are getting a voice. They see how women perform, how quickly
[Guest]: men usurp, try and usurp that and women fight back. And most importantly, democracy and the
[Guest]: electoral process becomes very proximate. So a local election, you know who the candidate is,
[Guest]: you know, you know, it's a very small scale and which is partly the reason why
[Guest]: turnouts are so high and highest at local elections. So the whole electoral process
[Guest]: becomes much more familiar, encouraging women to participate and therefore that has a knock-on
[Guest]: effect on all others. And the third reason is that this is also a decade after self-help groups
[Guest]: as an idea and as an institutional intervention has matured and it's a whole 10 years after.
[Guest]: Now, the self-help group argument is that the economic benefits of self-help groups
[Guest]: are extremely patchy and variable and frankly, you haven't turned women into entrepreneurs and
[Guest]: into entrepreneurs and it's a neoliberal con, right? But what they do achieve is an unintended
[Guest]: consequence, which is in some cases, like in Bengal, and I've written a paper about this,
[Guest]: where I show that a small intervention like here, the left front says, yes, there is money and you
[Guest]: can form, you know, you get seed funding, but you'll get the seed funding if you ensure that
[Guest]: every self-help group has members from different castes. All the castes in the village have to
[Guest]: be represented in every group, so you can't turn self-help groups into caste groups
[Guest]: or your friends and family. Whatever the form, what happens with groups of 10 women acting in
[Guest]: concert is the capacity for collective action is enhanced. And so I call this in my paper,
[Guest]: you know, the economic growth argument has been disputed by economists and others writing about
[Guest]: it. And I say actually what self-help groups have been successful in doing perhaps is creating civic
[Guest]: growth. There is political capacity being created just through a non-political activity. You know,
[Guest]: the most successful self-help group in my research village basically took over this
[Guest]: local school's midday meals. They said, this will be our activity. And it was a brilliant choice
[Guest]: because women could cook, the supplies came, they just made sure it was used properly,
[Guest]: and the children ate well, and they all had a stake in it. But it allowed them, you know,
[Guest]: that 10 rupee fare for a bus ride to go to the district meeting. The fact that women were mobile,
[Guest]: that were going, attending meetings, were meeting women from other parts of the district,
[Guest]: that they learned to organize, were all things that contributed to their political capacity.
[Guest]: And therefore, you begin to see your participation in elections in a completely different way. And
[Guest]: therefore, I think it's a very plausible explanation for why their turnouts go up.
[Guest]: So these are my three reasons.
[Amit Varma]: Wow, this is fabulous. And send me the link for your piece, I'll link it from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: And I was struck by the line that they all ate together and they all had a stake in it. And for
[Amit Varma]: a moment, I was thinking, oh, they're eating a stake, but surely not.
[Guest]: And the women didn't eat.
[Unknown]: No, the women, it was for the children. But, you know, all this was one thing as mothers,
[Guest]: they knew that the children, and look at the tragedies we've seen in modern India around
[Guest]: midday meals. And, you know, the tussle over whether you're going to give them an egg or not.
[Guest]: And here were these women who were innovating, they were saying, oh, if we save money, if we
[Guest]: do it like this, maybe we can give them all a small bunch of grapes each. They were very aware
[Guest]: that just eating so much rice was not good for them. They needed vegetables, they needed protein,
[Guest]: they needed fruit. So if you organize and learn to work, then together, the benefits way outstrip
[Guest]: every individual contribution. You know, that was their takeaway from.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely. And having skin in the game helps. It's not paternalistically decided from
[Amit Varma]: somewhere on top. So my next kind of question is this. And, you know, your book, I think,
[Amit Varma]: is a lot more than just answering the question, why India votes. It's also, it's got great insight
[Amit Varma]: and great anecdotes about how Indian elections actually are conducted. And among the things that
[Amit Varma]: we realize is, number one, the importance of good looks. Like at one point, you have somebody saying
[Amit Varma]: about, you know, this, and about this Adivasi politician that quote, she does not look like
[Amit Varma]: an Adivasi, she has an educated face. Then you also have this bit about how it matters what they
[Amit Varma]: wear. And when you talk about the significance of what they wear, like Mayawati's shining salwar
[Amit Varma]: kameez being sort of illustration of a mobility. And I would take that further and say maybe,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Arvind Kejriwal shirt, pant being an illustration of I'm one of you, I'm one of the
[Amit Varma]: middle class, and so on and so forth. And, you know, different examples of why they vote and
[Amit Varma]: why they go to rallies. And I wondered if you know, it's almost like mythology that we,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Ramlila or as kids, we would go to Dussehra and we would watch rallies are a bit
[Amit Varma]: like that. Now, my question is, therefore, this that so many complex factors go into voting,
[Amit Varma]: like what is already what is your community, or what is the tribe that you have chosen,
[Amit Varma]: or, you know, how someone looks or what someone wears, and, you know, perhaps even that hardwired
[Amit Varma]: instinct to prefer a strong leader, and so on and so forth. So is it the case that a lot of what
[Amit Varma]: happens in elections in terms of campaigning and all is actually redundant, it's a facade,
[Amit Varma]: the voters have already decided, like I remember reading a Nick Honmy book, I forget which one,
[Amit Varma]: where he came up with this interesting thing that, you know, when two people are about to start
[Amit Varma]: dating, you know, the woman decides very early on whether she's going to go with a guy or not
[Amit Varma]: very early on. And the rest of it is, it's just this elaborate social dance that kind of goes on.
[Amit Varma]: But the decision is made early on. And there's nothing anyone can do to change that. Is it the
[Amit Varma]: same for voters in that case? Is it that, you know, people talk about security theater and
[Amit Varma]: pandemic theater and so on? Is there also like an election theater, which would be both amusing
[Amit Varma]: and kind of wasteful? If you know, and I'm guessing that you've obviously got tons of insights into
[Amit Varma]: not just why people vote to begin with, but why they vote for whoever they're voting for.
[Guest]: Yeah, so I should preface my answer by saying that
[Guest]: when I was working on Why India Votes, it's based on research that the team conducted in 2009,
[Guest]: and the book came out in 2014. Elections in India have quite fundamentally changed after that.
[Guest]: So when one looks at elections now and studies them, it is a, it's like we are, it used to be
[Guest]: a cricket game. And now football is being played, but we are talking about it as if it's cricket.
[Guest]: It's like that. It's still a game, there are still spectators, but the game itself has changed. And
[Guest]: I think it's really important for all of us who write about elections, think about elections to
[Guest]: call this out by analyzing election results as if they are elections in the way that they were
[Guest]: meant to be conducted. We are complicit in legitimizing what has been a very serious
[Guest]: distortion of India's electoral procedures. So I think there is a before and after story.
[Guest]: And as I say in the preface to Cultivating Democracy, it was a privilege to study Indian
[Guest]: democracy when it worked, when it was a democracy, while it lasted. So in the same way, Why India
[Guest]: Votes is, you know, I can offer explanations for what was happening in elections at that time.
[Guest]: And now one would need to update one's analysis. And I've, you know, I've been traveling in India,
[Guest]: even in recent elections, 2019, I was there. It is a different ballgame. So that's the first,
[Guest]: you know, that's a very important preparatory remark. People don't make up their minds
[Guest]: way in advance. And the Lok Niti surveys actually show this from election to election.
[Guest]: You can tell because they do post-poll surveys and they do pre-poll surveys.
[Guest]: They actually are able to tell us after every election, whether that is Vidhan Sabha or Lok
[Guest]: Sabha, at which stage most people are making up their minds. So, and it changes from election to
[Guest]: election. The performance of, you know, you're right, it is like a Ramlila. It is, you know,
[Guest]: that's why the, you know, like Times of India board will say it's a festival of democracy and
[Guest]: so on. It is a festival, it's a tamasha. And like all tamashas in India, it is an assault on the
[Guest]: senses. It is loud, it is colorful, it is noisy, it is overwhelming an experience. So I'm always
[Guest]: struck, I voted in more British elections than I voted in Indian elections because as a Commonwealth
[Guest]: citizen, I can vote here. And I'm always struck how it's not a holiday. Nobody seems, if you came
[Guest]: to Britain on an election day, you would never know its elections are happening. Whereas in India,
[Guest]: that's impossible, right? It is such a big deal. It takes over public space. And political
[Guest]: communication, whether it is through oratory, which India has had incredible orators and continues to
[Guest]: do, and I've heard many of them live, so one has a good sense of how to compare people. But that's
[Guest]: sort of verbal communication. But in a scale, you know, an Indian Lok Sabha constituency is 20 times
[Guest]: the size of a British MP's constituency. Britain, given the tiny size it is, just compare the state
[Guest]: of the population, just the population figures, Britain has more MPs than India does. You know,
[Guest]: and a British MP is talking to 1 20th the size of a constituency. So communicating with your
[Guest]: constituency, and those millions of people, thousands, thousands that show up at political
[Guest]: rallies, the drama and the theater of it is very important. So what you wear, you know, and we
[Guest]: remember politicians who, you know, Mrs. Gandhi always wore the sari of the local area. Narendra
[Guest]: Modi wears the headgear often of places because people see that from a distance, even if they
[Guest]: can't hear them, they can at least see them. So all of those do, and conversation and deliberation
[Guest]: and discussion. So it isn't, in the past, it certainly wasn't a foregone conclusion who was
[Guest]: going to win, there was a genuine sense of excitement and suspense. You know, it was like,
[Guest]: we didn't know, it was like a one day match, you didn't know what was going to happen till the last
[Guest]: ball. To a certain extent, that is true of any election. But the reason why I say now to have
[Guest]: a discussion about the festival and the theater and political communication, all of these things
[Guest]: has to be quite fundamentally changed, because just the scale of the theater, I mean, there's
[Guest]: clearly some decorator who uses yards of pink fabric to decorate any BJP event, and they all
[Guest]: begin to resemble each other, right? The distance between the stage and the crowd seems to expand at
[Guest]: every rally. So people are standing very far away. So you've got to then put up expensive large
[Guest]: screens for people to actually see the leader you've come to hear.
[Guest]: And political communication, you know, this is the show to, it is a show of money and
[Guest]: visual, it's a shock and awe strategy. Because the communication is being done through those
[Guest]: WhatsApp groups. And the scale of it, where, you know, just in one small district somewhere,
[Guest]: a single person is running 1400 WhatsApp groups, and his job is to send out messages,
[Guest]: not to 1400 people, 1400 groups a day. So political communication and what is being
[Guest]: said from the stage and auditory and all is just, you know, it is a tamasha that you may or may not
[Guest]: be part of. It's like going to the circus, literally. You're not really going there to
[Guest]: learn anything about anything, because that is already on your phone. You're going there for
[Guest]: entertainment. And part of the shock and awe now is precisely, the further away you're from the
[Guest]: stage, you appreciate just how much money and power there is. So I suppose what I'm saying is that
[Guest]: the business of elections has changed radically in India because of electoral bonds, as I've said
[Guest]: before. The second thing that has changed, which again also I've alluded to before, is that the
[Guest]: neutrality of the Election Commission of India, which was famous. And, you know, I mean, Britain
[Guest]: set up its election commission, electoral commission, they called it in 2001, and they
[Guest]: sought advice from the Indian Election Commission. Irony of ironies, you know. And India routinely
[Guest]: advised nations across the world about, because it had a standing in this. That famous neutrality,
[Guest]: that calling out of hate speech, regardless of how powerful it was, the person offending,
[Guest]: the model code of conduct, which is an unwritten model, an unwritten code that all people signed
[Guest]: up to respecting. Those things have frayed very badly, right? So that's the second way it's been
[Guest]: assaulted. And the third way, which I really hope, Amit, your listeners think about this more. I'm
[Guest]: very struck that people don't think about this more, and I think it's very dangerous, is
[Guest]: there is a lot of controversy over EVMs, right? And whether machines are tinkered with or not.
[Guest]: And I think the jury is out on that. I don't have a view either way. I haven't seen enough evidence.
[Guest]: If you could fix all machines, then frankly, a party as powerful and as wealthy as the BJP
[Guest]: should be winning every election, which they don't. So I'm not saying that there is no truth
[Guest]: to it, but I don't know how much truth to it. But the most serious problem, for which we do have
[Guest]: evidence, is that when there were paper ballots, the ballot boxes from every polling booth were
[Guest]: collected in the counting center. And the first thing you did was you emptied them all into a
[Guest]: drum, and the drums were rolled to mix the ballot papers. Then you started the counting. So the
[Guest]: provenance of each ballot paper could not be as established. When you count EVM by EVM by EVM,
[Guest]: every electronic voting machine is assigned to a political booth, and so you get booth-level data.
[Guest]: You know for, and every booth covers about a thousand voters. So for every thousand voters,
[Guest]: you know what the vote division is. And therefore, the incentives, and more worryingly,
[Guest]: the punishments for not voting for the party in power are exacerbated.
[Guest]: A technological solution has been invented. It's called the Totalizer, which will electronically
[Guest]: mix the votes of all EVMs before counting, and several political parties led by the BJP have
[Guest]: blocked it. So the secrecy of the ballot, which our research in the 2009 elections, which we found
[Guest]: to be such an important aspect of people's enthusiasm for voting, saying, you know,
[Guest]: this is one thing you can't, I can do, I can vote for who the hell I like, nobody will ever know.
[Guest]: That has been threatened, and it has been deliberately threatened. And I remember
[Guest]: talking to the late Arun Jaitley about this, and asking him, you know, what it would take.
[Guest]: The Law Commission has recommended that the Election Commission adopt these Totalizers,
[Guest]: and he very blithely said to me, he said, you know, it helps with our booth management.
[Guest]: And I said, what is, you know, to have the data, and I said, what is booth management?
[Guest]: And he said, booth management is when we can tailor our manifesto to the needs of particular
[Guest]: areas. So if somebody wants, you know, a new pipe, new road, then we can respond to that, and so on.
[Guest]: I said, okay, Mr. Jaitley, can you give me an example of this? And of course, there's no example
[Guest]: of it, right? So booth management has become a term that is a euphemism for managing the electorate
[Guest]: through carrots and sticks, but more sticks. And you will remember that some years ago,
[Guest]: Maneka Gandhi actually said this in one of her election rallies. She said, we know if you'll
[Guest]: vote for us, and if you don't, there'll be trouble. And she was immediately silenced and told to
[Guest]: quieten down because you're not meant to reveal the game.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, there's, you know, I mean, as far as EVMs are concerned, I'm kind of skeptical about the
[Amit Varma]: hackability, but that's a moot issue. Because as my friend Nitin Pai says, you don't need to hack
[Amit Varma]: EVMs when you can hack minds, which is something these guys are experts at. And I had an episode
[Amit Varma]: with Shivam Shankar Singh also, who used to work for the BJP earlier, where he outlines the different
[Amit Varma]: ways in which that happens. And you mentioned sort of the scale of the tamasha. And in your
[Amit Varma]: book, you've also written about another sort of way that, you know, voters react in the sense,
[Amit Varma]: you point out that how very often at a rally, it doesn't matter what the person is saying,
[Amit Varma]: you give this example of this person when, you know, Rahul Gandhi comes and you asked him later,
[Amit Varma]: or your researcher asked him later, what did he say? And she says, Oh, he told us that the young
[Amit Varma]: leaders have to stand up against the established leaders. And he said no such thing. So they'll
[Amit Varma]: just imagine they'll just hear what they want to hear. And I connected that with that whole
[Amit Varma]: tamasha scale kind of thing. And I remembered that, you know, when the Beatles first broke big,
[Amit Varma]: right, you know, with, I want to hold your hand and she loves you and those early number ones.
[Amit Varma]: And when they'd go out touring and all that, the crowds would make so much noise that the music
[Amit Varma]: couldn't be heard. So they could literally not play anything. And the noise of the crowds would
[Amit Varma]: drown everything. And this struck me kind of like that, that it doesn't matter what music they're
[Amit Varma]: playing, you know, and that's one reason the Beatles stopped playing live. So I don't know.
[Guest]: How interesting. But it is very important. You know, in anthropology, we have this wonderful
[Guest]: term by Emile Durkheim called collective effervescence. And often people go to these
[Guest]: things to experience collective effervescence. It's what you experience at a football match.
[Guest]: Why do you go to live matches? After all, you can sit in the comfort of your home and watch
[Guest]: the replays and, you know, so on. But you go to be, to feel part of a collectivity
[Guest]: where you as an individual belong, but are lost and subsumed by it. And, you know, it's a
[Guest]: transcendent experience. And actually, what is happening is almost immaterial, because you can
[Guest]: be part of it. And there is no substitute for that live experience, right? Other than to be
[Amit Varma]: to be present. Yeah, you've got a few lovely passages about the liminality.
[Amit Varma]: Such a nice word. Liminality of the voting booth. It's a good word. Yeah, yeah. And what kind of
[Amit Varma]: goes on there. And the Totalizer, by the way, is a great name, but I think the BJP must have
[Amit Varma]: objected to it because they felt it applied. They should call themselves a Totalizer.
[Amit Varma]: Why some random software? That would be... To be honest, I don't care what it is called.
[Guest]: And Totalizer is not a... because it sounds like some sort of, I don't know, to me, it sounds like
[Guest]: some sort of enemy of a superhero, you know, that sort of destroys everything. But it sounds
[Amit Varma]: negative, basically. That's why it's a good word for the BJP. Well, it should be. I think just to
[Guest]: call it an electric mixing machine and everybody understands what it means, what is required.
[Amit Varma]: So here's my next question. One of the things that has worked for us in the past, like no matter how
[Amit Varma]: much bad governance we've got, no matter how much bad economics we've got, and God knows over 75
[Amit Varma]: years, we've had a lot of that. One of the things that has worked for us has been our institutions,
[Amit Varma]: right? And what has happened recently is those institutions have completely fallen away. You
[Amit Varma]: spoke about the Election Commission. We know what's happening to the Supreme Court. Recently,
[Amit Varma]: they made that judgment about those demolitions and it didn't matter. It didn't matter. Supreme
[Amit Varma]: Court has said don't carry it out. They just went and did it anyway, right? And it seems that
[Amit Varma]: through this one institution that is still functioning well is that institution of
[Amit Varma]: elections. This is where we are all equal. This is more or less an efficient process.
[Amit Varma]: And it is the opposite of whatever the opposite of totalizer would be. And you know, it does what it
[Amit Varma]: does. And I'm just wondering that why is that still the case? I mean, I understand that whole
[Amit Varma]: thing of why hack EVMs when you can hack mines and even assume EVMs are, you know, unhackable at
[Amit Varma]: scale if you think about it. But the point is that when a party has a kind of power that they do,
[Amit Varma]: the kind of boots on the ground that they do, the kind of technology that they do, you know,
[Amit Varma]: even this institution can be subverted. You know, Russia does it so well, for example,
[Amit Varma]: I'm sure Modi is a great admirer of Mr. Putin. So, you know, is this, have we just gotten lucky
[Amit Varma]: that so far we've been having elections and maybe these guys won't mess with it because
[Amit Varma]: they're winning anyway? Or do you feel that, do you worry that this might be the next step?
[Guest]: No, but Amita, I think they have messed with it. That was my preface to my last question.
[Guest]: That is exactly what I'm saying, that I don't think elections in India are what they used to
[Guest]: be before 2014. They have been distorted so fundamentally from the inside. They've been
[Guest]: hollowed out. You know, when we talk about the hollowing out of democracy, which we were doing
[Guest]: at the beginning, they've been hollowed out of meaning by these three things, by the election
[Guest]: commission is no longer neutral, the vote is no longer secret, and the relationship between money
[Guest]: and elections, which was always a problem, has now been legitimately made opaque through, you know,
[Guest]: legislation that was rushed through parliament as a money bill to introduce electoral bonds without
[Guest]: any parliamentary debate, to introduce electoral bonds. So these three things have completely
[Guest]: robbed elections of the credibility that they used to have. But this is the triumph of
[Guest]: the distortion and the game being played, is that we are going through the motions of elections as
[Guest]: if they are what they used to be. So people turn out to vote wearing their best saris, journalists
[Guest]: run around telling us stories of what is happening in every election booth and what is happening in
[Guest]: campaigns, and political scientists and journalists sit and analyze election results as if they were
[Guest]: a normal election. And I think every time we do that, we are normalizing the distortion,
[Guest]: which is exactly what is intended. That is what is going to keep, if you talk to any Western
[Guest]: government about India and whether India qualifies to belong to a club of democracies, the first
[Guest]: thing they say, come on, but at least they have elections, they have peaceful transfer of power,
[Guest]: which is exactly what we want to hear. You know, this is what you need to hear if you want to play
[Guest]: this game. So you want to be part of a club of democracies, so you don't mess with it so much
[Guest]: that you stop having elections, but you mess with it as much as you can to tilt the scales,
[Guest]: and I think electoral bonds have done that. And this talk of one nation, one election that
[Guest]: surfaces every few months is the final distortion. It is the final death knell of what elections
[Guest]: have been about in India, where people vote very differently, whether it is a
[Guest]: Vidhan Sabha or a Lok Sabha, and that difference is what you're taking away by doing a one nation,
[Guest]: one election model, and then it'll be complete. So I think when you were formulating your question,
[Guest]: you were talking about institutions and what credibility they have, and you're right,
[Guest]: I mean, the Supreme Court ruled that it was illegal to link Aadhaar with your bank account.
[Guest]: Can you have a bank account unlinked to your Aadhaar? No, people have just gone ahead and
[Guest]: done it, so it's irrelevant. But so there is an institutional story that is worrying,
[Guest]: but there is also a citizen story that is even more worrying, because the only safeguard,
[Guest]: and this is my main argument in cultivating democracy, is that democracy is not just about
[Guest]: some institutions. Democracy is about trying to create a certain kind of society of how you
[Guest]: interact, how you live with each other, and this is what Ambedkar was saying, you know,
[Guest]: that institutional story of democracy is political democracy, but we also want
[Guest]: social and economic democracy, and that is what we define by the word republic.
[Guest]: That is where the citizens are important, and the only way you can keep a political
[Guest]: democracy and its institutions doing the work that they're meant to do is by being vigilant
[Guest]: as citizens, and you have to call them out. You have to ask those questions. You can't say,
[Guest]: oh, all the elections are bent, all the institutions are what they are. This is
[Guest]: where the activists who call out the distortions on an everyday are so important to the life of
[Guest]: a polity, and anyone who cares about India's future as a democracy in the true sense of the word,
[Guest]: in the sense of the word where one year to the next you want to be a better democracy this year
[Guest]: than you were last year, needs to pay attention to those calling outs, needs to pay attention to
[Guest]: why the Supreme Court is being ignored. Why is the Election Commission not calling out hate speech
[Guest]: from all political parties? Why is the media taking its cue from the government on what story
[Guest]: to cover? Why are there elected representatives who don't face unscripted questions from the press?
[Guest]: If these questions are not being asked, then it's not a democracy in the true sense of the word.
[Amit Varma]: So let me, before we go on to talking about cultivating democracy,
[Amit Varma]: one question from taking off from what you just said that, you know, if this last institution
[Amit Varma]: institution that was kind of functioning okay, has also been subverted in this way,
[Amit Varma]: then how does this turn around? Like forget what is happening in our society,
[Amit Varma]: and we can talk about that also. And it is distressing and is going downhill very, very
[Amit Varma]: fast. Forget that for a moment. Just look at the decaying of our institutions are hollowing out
[Amit Varma]: of our democracy, as you said, just at that level, then you know, how does this turn around?
[Amit Varma]: Because then it doesn't matter if, you know, there are a few citizens who care and want to
[Amit Varma]: make us a republic again, and all of that. The point is, everything has been corrupted and
[Amit Varma]: subverted. And where is this? Where is the scope for that change going to come from?
[Guest]: It can only come from the citizens.
[Amit Varma]: But how? Because if even the voting process is subverted, if you know,
[Guest]: I think it will take, we should not forget that a lot of people may not be happy with the distortion
[Guest]: of institutions. You know, it's very easy. You hear this a lot about all national contexts,
[Guest]: right? You hear this a lot that, oh, it's so bad. Now, you know, how can you turn things around?
[Guest]: Liberal democracy has been a complete failure. Fukuyama was wrong. And, you know,
[Guest]: I think that even that despair, it may be true, but it's a luxury I don't, I feel personally,
[Guest]: I can't afford to have, because it absolves the rest, everyone from having to do anything,
[Guest]: because it's like, you know, what's to happen is going to happen anyway. But
[Guest]: a lot more vocalized calling out of each institution and its distortion. Imagine if,
[Guest]: you know, on Twitter, there's a handful of people you can rely on to ask those difficult questions.
[Guest]: And imagine if the handful was several million. And everybody, and I do believe that a lot of
[Guest]: people feel quite invested in India being a self-respecting democracy that is not about
[Guest]: cheating the system, that is not about politics of hatred, that is not about chauvinistic
[Guest]: majoritarianism. And it is, but, you know, you need to mobilize that opinion. And that's a
[Guest]: political agenda that needs to be focused on and done. And it's no easy task, and it won't be done
[Guest]: in a rush. Because the people working on the other side and looking to build this kind of
[Guest]: Hindu majoritarian agenda have been working for over 100 years.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, I actually I do have a little bit more hope from the electoral system than you do,
[Amit Varma]: but that's in the long run. In the short run, as Keen should have said, we are all dead.
[Amit Varma]: Let's talk about cultivating democracy then. And you started going to these two villages
[Amit Varma]: in 1998. And till 2013, you went every year, as you pointed out, you never got a sabbatical year
[Amit Varma]: to do it. So you were basically whenever there's an academic holiday, off you are to your favorite
[Amit Varma]: vacation spot, which are these, you know, villages in West Bengal. So how did this project take shape?
[Amit Varma]: And what are the questions that you were looking to answer? And what were the methods through which
[Amit Varma]: you chose to answer it?
[Guest]: Okay, so I've answered, I mean, some of it we've talked about before, in 1998 is when Lok Niti
[Guest]: did their survey, right? So that's what we found out that year that rural, low caste,
[Guest]: illiterate voters are more enthusiastic about voting than anyone else. And they said,
[Guest]: we need an ethnographer to go and do this. And I'd never lived in Bengal. But I speak Bengali
[Guest]: fluently. And as an adult, I had learned to read it when I was in Delhi school. Because of course,
[Guest]: growing up in Delhi, I learned Hindi and English, but not Bengali. So I felt I had enough distance
[Guest]: from West Bengal, I'd never lived there, but I could communicate and would locate my research
[Guest]: there. And it had this interesting political story of complete dominance by the left front.
[Guest]: So I visited all the villages that had been covered in the sample of the Lok Niti survey,
[Guest]: and chose these two villages because they were mostly Muslim. I had just finished my Pakistan
[Guest]: book, the Pathan book, and as I said, the Doman Bagdi population was near a highway. And, you know,
[Guest]: a lot of Indian villages, you've got to walk for a long way from the road, which you get off the bus,
[Guest]: and then you've got to walk through the fields to access them. These two villages quite fortuitously
[Guest]: were right by the road. So that was a big thing, because I knew I would be traveling a long way to
[Guest]: come and do field work, and that made a big difference. And I just plunged straight in.
[Guest]: Now for the first few years, to be honest, Amit, nobody trusted me. They were convinced the
[Guest]: Communist Party had sent me, or the government had sent me, I was a spy, I was reporting on
[Guest]: their activities, and people were terrified of the Comrade. Absolutely terrified. And because,
[Guest]: you know, the word in Bengali to be used, that the local Bengali press used to use was
[Guest]: shantrash, terror. So people would talk to me about everything but politics.
[Guest]: They said, don't, Didi, don't ask us about Rajniti, you know, we'll talk about everything else.
[Guest]: So it took me a very long time to build trust, and learn people's stories. And
[Guest]: the Comrade overstepped a line, a red line in the village. So despite his
[Guest]: omniscience, he suddenly was vulnerable. And I write about that's the first chapter of how
[Guest]: people began to challenge the Comrade's power. And that marked a turning point also for me, because
[Guest]: I began to hear secrets for the first time about the Comrade, and people realised I was very good
[Guest]: at never passing on secrets. That's my one fieldwork tip for anyone listening and to my students,
[Guest]: that the only way to win trust is never, ever, ever to pass on secrets. So people suddenly
[Guest]: realised, gosh, you know, you can tell her anything and nobody ever hears about it. So
[Guest]: I think that helped. And I then, because people were not talking to me in the village very much,
[Guest]: and Mamata Banerjee had just set up her Trinamool Congress in 1999 and won eight
[Guest]: Lok Sabha seats immediately. I spent one of my trips in Kolkata, just shadowing Mamata Banerjee.
[Guest]: I just, again, I had no, you know, I didn't know her, I just landed up and I said,
[Guest]: I'm really interested. And can I just hang out wherever you are? And I did that. And I got a lot
[Guest]: of flack from my left wing academic colleagues in Kolkata for it and friends saying, how can
[Amit Varma]: you take this woman seriously? You could have told them you were researching her saris.
[Guest]: Oh, then I would have had absolutely no credibility, Amit. But her saris, of course,
[Guest]: are a very important part of Mamata's, you know, the sort of ordinary dhoni khali as opposed to
[Guest]: any sort of expensive handloom. But one of the things that was said to me, which was so
[Guest]: revealing of, you know, those conversations that my mother used to have with our daughters,
[Guest]: was a very well-known academic, who shall remain unnamed, said to me,
[Guest]: how can you take her seriously? She looks like a maidservant.
[Guest]: Like a ji, you know, in modern Bangla, she looks like a ji.
[Guest]: I'm sure you do. And I was really shocked, but this, you know, it told me a lot about a lot of
[Guest]: things, as you can imagine, but it also told me something about the nature of communism in Bengal.
[Guest]: And these were card-carrying academics who, you know, were progressive people in life otherwise,
[Guest]: but the Bhadralok, the patrician, upper-caste Bhadralok character of the Communist Politburo
[Guest]: was unmistakable. So, to be challenged by, again, a dark-skinned, not very literary woman,
[Guest]: was, you know, Jyoti Basu was chief minister. He had patrician, fair-skinned good looks and
[Guest]: a crisp dhoti, and here was this woman in a crumpled sari and hawai chappals saying she's
[Guest]: challenging them, and how dare she, you know? I think if Mamata Banerjee looked different,
[Guest]: it might have been a different story, and their response would have been, but that really did
[Guest]: irk them for decades until, I mean, Shingur Nandigram gave her the opening, but all the time
[Guest]: before that, I think the grounds on which were dismissed were several, and people didn't like
[Guest]: her style of politics, and it was this, you know, jumping on the chief minister's cars and
[Guest]: registering her protest. They just said in Bangla the words that women, Communist Party women's wing
[Guest]: members would say to me, it's not together, it's not in order. This is no way to behave.
[Guest]: You have to behave like a bhadra mohila. She's not a bhadra mohila. She may be a Brahmin woman,
[Guest]: but she's not civilized in the way that we think women should conduct themselves in public.
[Guest]: So the criticism of Mamata in those early years showed up a lot of the hypocrisies in left-wing
[Guest]: politics as much as anything else, but for me, again, it was a genuine question. You know,
[Guest]: why were so many people voting for Mamata Banerjee? She just set up a party. She had
[Guest]: nothing to her name, and she had no established credibility. But, you know, in the Maidan in
[Guest]: Kolkata, where the big rallies used to be held and brigade ground and so on, you talk to the guy
[Guest]: selling chana choor, you're selling tea, and, you know, these people who are absolutely wrapped by
[Guest]: her speeches, and they say, Oto Durga. You know, she looks like Durga. Look at her. She's fearless.
[Guest]: All these strong men, and she's never afraid. And if you're in trouble, she always comes and
[Guest]: stands by you. Pashe Dalai. You know, she comes and stands by you, because she'd been fighting
[Guest]: for the hawkers on Goriya Hut in that month as it happened when I landed. So it not only taught
[Guest]: me something about West Bengal, it also taught me something quite fundamental about how Indian
[Guest]: politics works. And I went to her rallies later, and, you know, her incredible oratorial skills,
[Guest]: and, but now I haven't met her again in person since that one month. I spent shadowing her when
[Guest]: I saw her every day. But the fact that her exterior style hasn't changed, she's still
[Guest]: wearing those dhoni khalis kharis and still the hawai chappals, is not insignificant at all. You
[Guest]: know, that there has, she isn't wearing designer clothes like other politicians who claim humble
[Guest]: beginnings. They haven't, you know, she may have done good, but it's not reflected in her. That
[Guest]: political visual communication hasn't changed. Anyway, to go back to the village then. So it was,
[Guest]: so it really was to study the village in its entirety. As I said, I was interested,
[Guest]: there was nothing I was not interested in, to, you know, how the pukur is drained every few years.
[Guest]: And, you know, when a pukur is drained, you take the soil from the bottom of the pukur,
[Guest]: which is wet and muddy. And that is the best fertilizer you can ever have for the crops.
[Guest]: So it's very coveted. From that to the minutiae of farming, to weddings and circumcisions and,
[Guest]: you know, in that very anthropological holistic, I'm interested in everything kind of way,
[Guest]: began to get a sense of what the village was about.
[Amit Varma]: And what I also found fascinating was just in the way that you approach this in terms
[Amit Varma]: of methodology, that you pick these four events, and then you analyze them threadbare,
[Amit Varma]: and you come at these larger principles and larger conclusions from there. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you spoke about that being inspired by something called the Manchester School.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me in general, what is this Manchester School? And then what are these four kind of
[Amit Varma]: events? And what are the insights that you kind of, that they drove you towards?
[Guest]: Okay, so the Manchester School of Anthropology was really set up by Max Gluckman, a South African
[Guest]: anthropologist, who then came to Manchester and set up the department there. There are many things
[Guest]: can be said about the Manchester School, but for our purposes, what was significant was,
[Guest]: you know, they were the first really British anthropologists who are South Africans,
[Guest]: or South Africans, white anthropologists studying Africa, who were interested in change,
[Guest]: who had a theory of, you know, were wanting to understand how the post-colonial or the
[Guest]: colonial context was not just a static place where people from time immemorial, you know,
[Guest]: the tribes had existed like this forever, but saw societies as a dynamic space where things changed.
[Guest]: And to also confront social inequalities, including through race. So Gluckman's own work,
[Guest]: he puts himself as a white anthropologist very much in the frame. But what inspired me most was,
[Guest]: you know, what was called situational analysis. You took, like, he has this famous essay on the
[Guest]: inauguration of a bridge, and every aspect of that inauguration is described and analysed.
[Guest]: So, you know, where the missionaries are standing to where the magistrate is standing,
[Guest]: are they standing together, is there a tent, who's in the sun, who's not, who's eating cake,
[Guest]: who are the native populations that are there, what do they cook as part of feasting,
[Guest]: every detail is presented. And you begin to realise that to really understand the significance
[Guest]: of any such event, you need to appreciate that minutiae. And you appreciate it because the people
[Guest]: participating in it think it is important. So the one, the person who baked the cakes and put it on
[Guest]: a particular tray in a particular tent has done it with a certain set of intentions. And as
[Guest]: anthropologists, our job is to pick up on those details. So that's, you know, that was a big
[Guest]: takeaway. Victor Turner, who, of course, you know, whose biggest contribution to the literature is
[Guest]: that word liminality that you mentioned before, had this whole sort of anthropology of ritual and
[Guest]: how you see an event that is, what is the ritual form? You dissociate the ritual form from religion,
[Guest]: from smells and bells, as we call it. You think about it as a structural moment where
[Guest]: there is a similarity in all rituals, whether, say, it is a college graduation,
[Guest]: whether it is a wedding, whether it is a football match. A ritual moment always has three aspects
[Guest]: to it, drawing from Van Genep's work, of you first mark the start of a ritual by dissociating it from
[Guest]: the status quo. So you wear different clothes or you stop time, you go somewhere special.
[Guest]: Then the ritual happens in a time when it is, you know, anti-structure. It's not like society. So
[Guest]: often the rules that would normally be applicable in society are not applicable, and they are often
[Guest]: egalitarian. They are liminal, they're fleeting, they are this moment of anti-structure is not
[Guest]: permanent and that's its power. And then you reincorporate yourselves into the status quo,
[Guest]: but this time touched by the transcendence of that liminal ritual moment in the middle.
[Guest]: And I take this and I use it to analyse, in this kind of detail, four events in the society,
[Guest]: each drawn from the four main subsections of any society, politics, religion, kinship,
[Guest]: and marriage, and the economy. And the scandal is a sexual scandal, and, you know, I talk about how
[Guest]: I talk about how people use it to challenge the power of the comrade. I look at the harvest to see
[Guest]: how it is conducted, and then kurbani, which we talked about earlier, and then an election.
[Guest]: Now this does various things. You begin to see an election as part of a village's social life.
[Guest]: It's, you know, journalists go to villages only during elections. They have no idea what
[Guest]: happens in between elections. And this is redressing that. You see how an election
[Guest]: fits into a community's life. But you also begin to see the interrelationships between them,
[Guest]: and you see how through this framework of the anthropology of ritual,
[Guest]: one thing that the anthropology of ritual teaches you is that one of the products of rituals
[Guest]: is that they are able to create values, values not for the first time, but they reassert the values
[Guest]: that we want to be associated with. They make them desirable, and they recommit ourselves to it.
[Guest]: So if you think about, say, a college annual day,
[Guest]: you all belong to a college, you're very proud of it, you belong to it, you want to be an alumna,
[Guest]: keep in touch. But at the annual day, what you're doing is, if you have a college song,
[Guest]: or if you have a function, or you stand together, or dress up and get your parents to come,
[Guest]: or friends and family, you are reasserting those aspects of the college that you want to be
[Guest]: associated with. You're not creating them for them, but you are creating them for them.
[Guest]: But you are re-performing them, holding them up as ideals that you want to recommit yourself to,
[Guest]: and any ritual does this. Now, what I'm able to show is that each of these four events creates
[Guest]: different values, and these values that they create are actually essential for democratic politics.
[Guest]: So, just to give you one example from the harvest,
[Guest]: so much is going on in an harvest, but it is, as somebody said to me, actually, it's just like
[Guest]: voting, you know. Everybody has one job in a harvest. You're either cutting the stalks,
[Guest]: or you're tying the strings, or you're sweeping a yard, but you know that without that one job,
[Guest]: you will not have a successful harvest. So the relationship between individual effort and
[Guest]: collective, the collective win at the end, is established. And it is a very democratic idea,
[Guest]: this way of linking individual to the collective. So I showed this with each of the events to show
[Guest]: how each event produces a cluster of values that have affinity with democratic politics,
[Guest]: and therefore, feed the creation of democratic culture.
[Amit Varma]: You know, what I found so fascinating about this is, it's almost like things are happening,
[Amit Varma]: and then there's a freeze frame, right, which is this event you're talking about. And then you
[Amit Varma]: zoom into different parts of the freeze frame, and you explain it, and everything just comes
[Amit Varma]: to life so beautifully. And it's just so kind of endlessly fascinating, and a lesson in, you know,
[Amit Varma]: people who want to sort of look at the world in this kind of way, or explore possibilities,
[Amit Varma]: or explore possibilities like this. It's almost as if you are zooming into a single water drop
[Amit Varma]: and finding the entire universe in there. And, you know, and I'll leave it to my listeners to,
[Amit Varma]: you know, discover the rest of your book, and they should really buy all your books,
[Amit Varma]: so that they're not all available, but this cultivating democracy is. But my question here
[Amit Varma]: is this, that you've explained the universe through this drop of water, or through these
[Amit Varma]: different drops of water, and you zoom back up, and you've sort of written about this.
[Amit Varma]: Now, are you going to zoom back into more droplets of water? Or given what you know about the
[Amit Varma]: universe now, given the picture that you've painted, given the way in which you see India now,
[Amit Varma]: where every day we, you know, things are getting worse, and it's more and more is becoming clear.
[Amit Varma]: What do you see now as your role within this discourse, within this whole field of taking
[Amit Varma]: knowledge and turning it into insight and all of that? What's next for you? Where do you see
[Guest]: yourself? What's happening now? That is the question I ask myself every single day, Amit.
[Guest]: You know, it really is. Intellectually, I have the next project ready, you know,
[Guest]: it's written up, it's, you know, I'm raring to go start the fieldwork for it on taxation,
[Guest]: like I said. And again, you know, the taxation will generate its own droplets, right? And it's
[Guest]: a lovely metaphor. And you're absolutely right. It's that zooming in that reveals patterns and
[Guest]: so much insight. That is exactly what the ethnographic method achieves. So, as an
[Guest]: academic, I can keep doing work that hopefully will generate more and more insight into this
[Guest]: endlessly fascinating society we call India. I personally find it very difficult to stay
[Guest]: within that role only because it may be because of living abroad for nearly 32 years now and
[Guest]: remaining an Indian citizen. You know, so I've had to, I can't take it for granted being Indian.
[Guest]: I have to consciously, every time I have to apply for a visa or queue at Heathrow for three hours
[Guest]: to get into the country, even though I have residency, I have to think about this choice.
[Guest]: You know, why am I continuing to be a citizen? And there are lots of reasons, but the relevant
[Guest]: one here is that if I am that attached to being an Indian, does my relationship,
[Guest]: when I can see what is wrong and that some things are very wrong and need to be righted,
[Guest]: can one get away by not doing anything? And then you think, well, you're not an activist,
[Guest]: you are an academic, and obviously my primary job is to teach students and do my job at LSE
[Guest]: and write and publish, and I have to keep doing that. There is no way of not doing that.
[Guest]: But is there more one can do? And I think it is important to, when one is asked to,
[Guest]: one thing that I really have tried to do all the years, and especially in the last,
[Guest]: you know, six or seven years, is engage much, much more with a wider audience that's way beyond the
[Guest]: university, way beyond academia. So I talk to the press, I write for the newspapers,
[Guest]: I talk to television stations all over the world. If anyone asks me to comment,
[Guest]: I brief diplomats going to India, because I think what else is academic insight for? If you go to
[Guest]: analyze, I'm not, I'm not claiming to be the only truth. There is always anyone listening to my
[Guest]: briefing has capacity, you know, has the free will to go and ask other people. So I don't have any
[Guest]: privileged position. But if I think something is the truth, then it should be spoken regardless of
[Guest]: who is in power. What I said about elections, I have studied elections so deeply for so long,
[Guest]: I know that what I'm saying is true, and it needs to be said. And that too is, I suppose,
[Guest]: it's an expanded role of the academic. It's not activism by any means, because I'm carrying on
[Guest]: and doing a different day job. But it can become a part of, everybody has to make their choices.
[Guest]: But my choice is that I think this needs to be shared a lot more widely. And I do.
[Amit Varma]: Well said and more power to you. So my final question, which is kind of predictable,
[Amit Varma]: I think for both you and the listeners is that okay, we're done with the serious stuff. But
[Amit Varma]: tell us now about the books and films and music that you love. Like what's your what's your desert
[Amit Varma]: island collection out there, which you, you know, want everyone to read or listen to or watch or
[Guest]: whatever? I've always, you know, it's, it's, it's a lovely question. But it's also, I think,
[Guest]: you know, desert island discs should be done with Indians as a, as a program properly, you know,
[Guest]: with the copyright, because I think the music, the stories, the personalities are so fabulous.
[Guest]: I think it's a format that can be endlessly repeated. I always think it would be a great
[Guest]: dinner party format, wouldn't it, with a bunch of friends, if every time you met,
[Guest]: you one person shared their favorite eight albums and talked about why
[Guest]: their favorite and it would be a very nice way to get to know each other really well.
[Guest]: But I mean, recommend, I read so voraciously, so much fiction, that I can't really recommend
[Guest]: anything, so to speak. But there's one book, which I think we need to, which, you know,
[Guest]: has been very significant for me, because it was one of those huge eye openers by Syed
[Guest]: Mujtaba Ali called Deshe Be Deshe, which is a Bengali gentleman from Kolkata, who goes to the
[Guest]: Northwest Frontier. Wow. And, and, you know, this is a sort of early 20th century account,
[Guest]: and it's wonderful. And I've read it in Bangla, but it needs to be read, and translated,
[Guest]: and discussed, because it's one of those tales that upends so many held certainties. And I think,
[Guest]: you know, that's what art and fiction are wonderful about. Music, you know, I think for
[Guest]: the first time in this most recent book, I've actually in my acknowledgements mentioned a
[Guest]: musician, because I was finishing the book in the middle of the pandemic, and the lockdowns, and,
[Guest]: which I found incredibly conducive to work as it happened. But the person who really,
[Guest]: it was Dhrupad, you know, and for me, I'm through my Spikma K years, you know, when my eyes were
[Guest]: also open, my parents were great, great lovers of Hindustani classical music. So, you know,
[Guest]: that was what they got out of living in Delhi the most and took us along. Even if he fell asleep,
[Guest]: that was fine. We were just meant to be there, imbibing it into our subconscious. But Spikma K
[Guest]: then opened my, you know, eyes to the great Carnatic musicians as well. You know, so we're
[Guest]: just getting to the end of Sherman Goody, Srinivas Iyer, DK Pattamal, you know, these were people
[Guest]: I wouldn't have otherwise heard. So, one had a much more all India sense of the different
[Guest]: classical traditions in India. But in all of this, now the older I get, I find Dhrupad is
[Guest]: my absolute favourite because it is the distilled essence of what we would call Hindustani classical.
[Guest]: You know, there's very few words, you know, there are just five syllables it improvises on.
[Guest]: It's very meditative and very, it's the only music I can work with because I'm not getting
[Guest]: caught up in it. You know, it puts me in a state of focus and concentration. So, Uday Bhavalkar is
[Guest]: my absolute top favourite vocalist and we are exactly the same age. And it's been such a
[Guest]: privilege to, from when he was a young first artist of the Spikma K concerts, he sang at my
[Guest]: big birthday. As it happened, it was complete luck that he was in London that year at that time.
[Guest]: And that was wonderful. But, I mean, he's a great, great musician and I love listening to him.
[Guest]: And his guru is Yamauddin Dagar, who used to play the Rudra Veena. And, yeah, but, you know,
[Guest]: I listen to any classical music from our traditions, really. I'd love to listen to
[Guest]: Bonavista Social Club, which I don't know many of your listeners know this, it's slightly dated,
[Guest]: slightly dated, but I discovered it at a time when I was writing about my old revolutionaries
[Guest]: and the Pashtuns and actually the stories are not that dissimilar. It is a producer who goes
[Guest]: looking for these old Cuban men and, you know, it's very similar. So, what they create by coming
[Guest]: together, because of the intervention of this outsider, was very similar. And I love that music
[Amit Varma]: anytime. And it's a lovely documentary. It's a gorgeous, yeah, that's the kind of film we need
[Guest]: to make, right, with this. And then there is, I should mention, this very young artist who is,
[Guest]: I think, my most favorite instrumentalist, is this young chap who, again, I've known for many years,
[Guest]: young musician called Shoumik Datta. And, I mean, Shoumik learned to play the Sarod from
[Guest]: Buddha Devdas Gupta, who is, again, very favorite Sarodiya classical musician that I, whom I knew
[Guest]: and love to listen to. But what Shoumik also does is that he's grown up in London and had his talim
[Guest]: in India and back and forth. But now the music he's, so he's very well classically trained.
[Guest]: But he's also, he produces a global, a London, you know, his music is the product of the city
[Guest]: of London. He collaborates with a wide range of artists, range of musicians, sometimes dancers,
[Guest]: voice, percussion, all kinds of interesting instruments, some of which I've heard only at
[Guest]: his concerts. So in many ways, his music stands for the best kind of modernity that the classics
[Guest]: can create, you know, which is about a bricolage of different traditions and creating something new
[Guest]: and exciting and modern and life-affirming. It's wonderful music. So, I mean, if your listeners
[Guest]: should just check him out. Thank you so much for that. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: there is joy in the world after all. So thank you so much. We've spoken for almost five hours,
[Amit Varma]: I think, and I love reading all of your books. And I'm going to listen to this conversation again,
[Amit Varma]: and I'm sure I'll pick up a lot from it. Thank you.
[Guest]: Thank you very much, Amit, for your questions, for inviting me
[Amit Varma]: and for the way you have curated this format. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: If so, would you like to support the production of the show? You can go over
[Amit Varma]: to seenunseen.in slash support and contribute any amount you like
[Amit Varma]: to keep this podcast alive and kicking. Thank you.